Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Strike action resumes: Despite a court order preventing essential service workers from engaging in the National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union (Nehawu) strike, the union says it will continue to disrupt public services. Nehawu said that essential services workers have been ordered to stop striking, but Home Affairs, Social Services and other non-essential government employees have joined the strike. [EWN] Degree questions: The University of Fort Hare says the new Public Service and Administration Minister, Noxolo Kiviet obtained an honours degree in administration and a master’s in public administration without possessing a junior degree. When she got her honours degree, she only had a matric certificate and a non-credit short-course certificate with handwritten results. The university reported Kiviet to the SIU regarding her degrees. [News24] Beggars targeted: The Tshwane Metro Police Department (TMPD) says it will arrest beggars who direct traffic at intersections where traffic lights are not working due to load shedding. TMPD senior superintendent Isaac Mahamba said that the department plans to arrest beggars as they are impersonating traffic officers and posing a risk to themselves and motorists. In some cases, TMPD officers have been seen chasing beggars away and then simply driving away. [MyBroadband] Tshwane new speaker: African Transformation Movement (ATM) councillor Mncedi Ndzwanana is the new City of Tshwane speaker. Ndzwanana – who was backed by the ANC-led coalition – beat Action SA’s Kholofelo Morodi in votes. He replaces COPE’s Murunwa Makwarela, who became the City’s Mayor but resigned amid allegations that he forged a court letter regarding his insolvency status. [EWN] Markets: The South African rand firmed on Monday as the dollar fell sharply on expectations that the largest US bank failure since the 2008 financial crisis would prompt the Federal Reserve to slow the pace of its interest rate hikes. Investors speculated the Fed would no longer raise rates by 50 basis points this month after the sudden collapse of Silicon Valley Bank. On Tuesday (14 March), the rand was trading at R18.24/$, R19.53/€, and R22.18/£. Brent crude is trading at $79.94 a barrel. [Nasdaq]