Huawei is a leader in smartphone photography, and its latest flagship smartphone – the HUAWEI Mate50 Pro – is one of the top DXOMark smartphone camera rankings. It has achieved this world’s-best ranking thanks to its XMAGE technology – a self-developed imaging engine that drives the HUAWEI Mate50 Pro. XMAGE incorporates Huawei’s years of research and development into optical systems, mechanical structures, imaging technology, and image processing to produce an unrivalled smartphone photography experience. In fact, the technology is so impressive that it has computing optics that exceed physical limits – providing clearer and more detailed images than should be possible. Its ultra-sensing imaging unit increases light intake by 40%, too, and uses upgraded image algorithms thanks to the new XD Fusion Pro ultra-HD image engine. All of this works behind the scenes to make the HUAWEI Mate50 Pro the ultimate smartphone for mobile photography.  The HUAWEI Mate50 Pro’s camera hardware is just as impressive as its XMAGE engine. This is headlined by the phone sporting the mobile industry’s first adjustable aperture – with ten sizes that each adjust your photo’s depth of field without using artificial technologies. You can precisely control these aperture sizes with ease in the HUAWEI Mate50 Pro’s professional mode, while the 50MP Ultra Aperture sensor captures these photos. In addition, this camera has an RYYB sensor that works in tandem with the XD Fusion Pro image engine to ensure pristine contrasts. The HUAWEI Mate50 Pro comes equipped with several other sensors, too – including a 50MP ultra aperture, 13MP ultra-wide angle, and 64MP telephoto – joined by a 13MP ultra-wide angle front camera. Incredibly, the 64MP lens supports up to 200x zoom range – letting you hone in on objects that would otherwise be specks in the distance. Taking pictures at night is also a superb experience thanks to the HUAWEI Mate50 Pro’s built-in Super Night mode. This captures clear and vivid images in low-light situations.  The HUAWEI Mate50 Pro and its camera system are perfect for mobile photographers and deliver crystal-clear photos in any situation. It is available in South Africa from the Huawei online store and selected retailers in vegan leather orange, silver and black – with 256GB and 512GB. Click here to buy the Huawei Mate50 Pro.