Valentia Manor House, situated on Val de Vie Estate in the Cape Winelands has been listed for €7.2million. The 11-bedroom, 10-bathroom home was crowned the Best Single Unit Residential Development in Africa at the 2016/17 International Property Awards. Register your interest in the Valentia Manor House As South Africa’s leading luxury wellness Estate, Val de Vie Estate has recorded unprecedented demand in both a sales and rental capacity from the local South African, European and international markets. Commenting Ryk Neethling, Marketing Director at Val de Vie Estate said: “We continue to see more and more people, both locally and from overseas, choosing Val de Vie Estate as a place to settle for the long term. This includes South African nationals returning home, and clients from further afield such as Europe, the United States and Canada.  “This resulted in record-breaking sales prices achieved during 2022, which continues into 2023. On average, house prices on the Estate have increased more than 20% and land more than 30%. Over the last 12 months, we have recorded total sales of R3.1 billion across the greater Estate, a 29.2% increase from R2.4 billion the previous year.” “The sales value of the Valentia Manor House is testament to this – and we expect this upwards trajectory to continue, driven by extremely strong demand.” Valentia Manor House draws inspiration from the French chateau style and features modern design elements for a truly unique aesthetic. A magnificent crystal chandelier hangs from the foyer’s double-volume ceiling, while a twin spiral marble staircase frames both the foyer and the manicured garden to the rear of the property.  When you walk through the right wing of Valentia Manor House, you will encounter a grand formal dining room that is accentuated by stylish feature archways.  In addition, there is a spacious formal living area where you can host friends and family, and a beautiful country-style kitchen with a breakfast nook and a full butler’s kitchen that can be used to prepare multiple courses for your guests. The ground floor also features a guest room, with private en suite bathroom. The left wing of the house has a dedicated office space with its own cloakroom, should you wish to work remotely. When you’re done working, you can relax in the lounge area and pick a book to read from your personal library while enjoying a glass of wine from your large private cellar.  Other key features of this wing include an expansive entertainment area with ample seating, your own bar, an indoor braai area (or BBQ area, for our international friends), and a farmhouse kitchen with a built-in Dover stove. The first floor is home to the master bedroom – a stunning space with a walk-in dressing room that has enough cupboard space for even the most avid fashionista.  The master bedroom’s luxurious en suite bathroom then features a double shower, while its jacuzzi bathtub is the perfect place to relax after a hard day of work.   This is complemented by four grand bedrooms on the first floor – each of which feature their own en suite bathroom to create individual spaces for families of any size. For entertainment, you can enjoy this floor’s spacious games room or its soundproof home cinema. If you prefer to spend time outside, Valentia Manor House’s luxury and function will follow you – providing a jacuzzi, pool, and a pool house with its own gym and steam room. Valentia Manor House is situated on an enormous 26.33-hectare lifestyle farm on Val de Vie Estate that hosts an incredible range of natural wonders, including: 5 hectares of established orange groves
Dormer sheep and springbok
Various grazing camps
Two boreholes, plus Berg river irrigation water rights
A boma along the banks of the property’s dam
Large spacious family office block
Farm store
Four separate cottages (which are currently being let long-term)  You can also enjoy the beautiful Cape Winelands setting by using one of two picnic areas that are set on the banks of the Berg River, across from an uninhabited four-hectare island. You will be treated to panoramic mountain views at all times, too – turning every sunset and sunrise into a work of art. Among all the beautiful and luxurious homes available on Val de Vie Estate, the Valentia Manor House stands out as something truly special.        