The City of Cape Town’s General Valuation Roll 2022 (GV2022) is open for public inspection until 30 April 2023 electronically (email or e-services) or 31 March 2023 at 30 inspection venues across the city. The General Valuation determines what contributions property owners make to the shared rates account. Rates are used for services shared by all residents, such as fire services, libraries, recreational areas, community facilities and clinics. According to the city, the new rates estimating calculator is now live, allowing property owners to see what their estimated rates could be from 1 July 2023. The automated rates calculator on the city’s website enables property owners to determine the likely impact of the GV2022 property valuations on their rates bill, including any reduction in residential property valuations, before applying the provisional rate-in-the-Rand. With previous versions, the proposed rate-in-the-Rand was normally only tabled at the March Budget Council meeting – leaving property owners guessing the rates liability of their new valuations. On 21 February, the city announced its plans to increase rates and taxes rebates for property owners in the 2023/24 financial year. The rebate for properties valued under R5 million will increase from R285,000 to R435,000 – a 52% rates relief increase. This is in addition to the statutory R15,000 exemption for all properties, which means the first R450,000 of those residential properties’ values will be exempt from paying rates, said the City of Cape Town The upper qualifying limit for pensioners and social grant recipients will also rise from R17,500 to R22,000 monthly household income. According to the city, under the new rebates, more than 80% of all properties in Cape Town will qualify for the relief. The proposals formed part of a General Valuation policy package. Cape Town’s mayor Geordin Hill-Lewis said the measures aim to ease the pressure on households due to the rising cost of living. Siseko Mbandezi, the city’s mayoral committee member of the finance, said that this year, the valuation date is 1 July 2022. “The accurate and fair market value is determined by comparable sales information around the valuation date in most cases,” he said. “Ratepayers are encouraged to use the City’s website to view their property information, including the valuation notice, pre-populated objection form, link to e-services and the provisional rates calculator.” The mayoral member of finance added that if property owners wish to lodge a complaint, it is best to do so via e-services or by email. The City of Cape Town provided the following steps on how to use the calculator for GV2022: Step 1: Visit: www.capetown.gov.za/GV2022 (there is also a trending box on the City’s website landing page) Step 2: Enter the erf number or property address on the GV2022 Roll opening page.  Step 3: Select ‘Rates Estimation’ from the menu on the left of the screen of useful information available about the selected property.  Read: This is what houses look like in South Africa’s 10 richest neighbourhoods