The 2023 Mobile World Congress (MWC) has kicked off in Barcelona with lots of interesting mobile-focused tech and gadgets on display. The event started on 28 February and ended yesterday (2 March). Major tech companies Huawei, Lenovo, Oppo and Xiaomi were all at the event, with smaller companies also drawing attention. The event does not only feature mobile phones but laptops, augmented reality and virtual reality headsets, smartwatches and other exciting gadgets were all on display. Below are some of the most exciting pieces of tech seen at the event: Phones Phones were incredibly important at the MWC, with foldable phones taking centre stage. Honor Magic Vs is an updated version of the brand’s first affordable phone and has a raft of new specs and features. For one, there is no gap when the phone is folded shut, a trait that is more common among non-Samsung foldable. In addition, unlike the majority of foldable phones, the new OPPO Find N2 Flip folds vertically. Like its horizontal counterpart, it has a larger screen, a more extensive set of more competitive cameras and an almost crease-less display. Smaller brand Tecno also introduced a foldable phone, the Phantom V Fold, with a striking ultra-clear 5-lens camera system with a 50MP main camera and a 16MP main screen camera. Generally, foldable phones have very limited space for camera sensors, making it impressive that Tecno was able to achieve the feat before its large competitors. Laptops Although laptop announcements have not been highly prevalent at MWC, Lenovo did announce some changes to its popular Thinkpad series. The ThinkPad X13 Gen 4 is getting a new-generation Intel Core I-series processor, and one of the heat vents is moving to the rear – preventing the laptop from overheating if the underside is blocked. The Thinkpad  Z13 Gen 2 will come with AMD Ryzen 7000 series processors. According to Lenovo, the Thinkpad Z13 series will also have a food-derived display lid covered with flaxseed fibre on the laptop’s top. Lenovo said that it aimed t0 bamboo fibre and paper-based moulds to replace its plastic packages as part of its environmental initiatives. Eyewear Virtual reality and augmented reality products were also prominent at MWC. HTC also unveiled its new standalone Vive XR Elite headset, which offers a smaller design. HTC also included some aspects of augmented reality within the headset. OPPO is also committing to the AR-equipped device industry via its Air Glasses 2. The sleek-looking glasses include features such as real-time translation, navigation, and some forms of messaging. Xiaomi also introduced its own AR headset – AR Glass Discovery Edition, which may be the lightest of its kind. The headset has the same powerful processor as the Meta Quest 2 but in a much smaller package. Xiaomi said that its AR headset will still offer the same capabilities as other AR and VR headsets without burdening the user’s head. Other cool gadgets Many smartwatches were present at the event, but one of the most interesting watch-centred gadgets was Huawei’s Watch Buds. The watch opens up to reveal a charging dock for a pair of Huawei earbuds. In addition, ZTE’s nubia Pad 3D is a tablet that will enable viewing stereoscopic 3D content without using a headset. It will also be able to transform plain 2D content into 3D. Moreover, at CES earlier this year, German Bionic announced an exoskeleton intended to help protect workers when lifting heavy objects. Spanish company Able Human Motion has gone one step further by creating an exoskeleton that can partially help people with mobility impairments walk again during clinical rehabilitation. The exoskeleton requires something to lean on, but it is still encouraging. Read: 4 changes coming soon to WhatsApp