Hybrid shopping has become the new normal in South Africa, with consumers wanting greater convenience when they purchase items. During the Covid-19 pandemic, more consumers were shopping online as they were stuck at home. Currently, there is a preference among consumers for both online and in-store shopping. Research from IBM showed that hybrid shopping is the primary buying method for 27% of consumers. Studies from Vodafone also found that 75% of businesses said that their customers expect to be able to interact with the brand anytime, anywhere via their digital services. There are, however, a few reasons why consumers have not completely turned their backs on traditional brick-and-mortar shopping centres. For one, all shoppers have different mindsets and enjoy shopping in their own way. What works for some may not work for others. Others remain unconvinced over online shopping’s effectiveness. Online shopping can be incredibly time-consuming as customers go through endless lists of items. There may also be technical issues, such as forgetting login details or problems with digital payments at checkout. Some shoppers simply prefer to drive to the store, quickly find the item they need, purchase it and leave. However, this is not to say that these customers are completely opposed to online shopping. Online shopping can be more convenient during busy shopping times, such as Black Friday or the build-up to Christmas. For example, it can limit the time spent in queues. In addition, shoppers prefer multiple channels to get what they want in the most efficient manner possible. Click & Collect shopping, where customers order items online and then pick them up from a pickup point, compliments the hybrid model, with its popularity continuing to grow post-pandemic. Popular stores across the country also serve as pickup points, making it more convenient for customers as they can pick up what they’ve ordered online when running other errands. “It is now the minimum to offer a variety of delivery options, like click and collect, home delivery and returns, among others, to shoppers. It’s all about making their lives easier,” said the CEO of click and collect company Pargo, Lars Veul. “That’s why hybrid shopping has become what it has – convenience. Even if you’re in a township area or places couriers find difficult getting to, there’s a pickup point nearby so you can simply collect your order when you go out to top up on bread and milk.” Click & Collect also can help with pricing, as costs are brought down via consolidated deliveries. Read: Big shift inbound for shopping malls in South Africa