For businesses and individuals who need money transferred out of South Africa quickly and securely, Rand Swiss will take care of the entire process – from start to finish. Rand Swiss offers foreign exchange and cross-border transfer solutions to suit a variety of needs, such as if you are emigrating, selling a property abroad, investing in an international stock market or business, or donating funds to a friend or family member overseas. Click here to contact Rand Swiss The benefits of using Rand Swiss include: Highly-competitive exchange rates.
Access to over 60 countries and 25 currencies.
Transfer times of as little as 2-5 days.
Expert support from a dedicated broker.
Exchange control guidance. You will also have peace of mind knowing that all Rand Swiss transactions are highly secure, and approved by the SARB. In addition to this, Rand Swiss will provide clients with a complimentary SARS Tax Clearance Certificate when they move more than R1 million offshore during a calendar year. Corporate clients who require more complex services will be glad to know that Rand Swiss is expertly equipped to handle your needs. Its current client base includes importers and exporters, and companies incurring cross-border payments and receipts. Rand Swiss is therefore ready to assist with spot contracts and forward contract facilities, foreign direct investment applications, and related SARB applications. Click here to contact Rand Swiss Rand Swiss is an authorised Financial Services Provider, regulated by the FSCA, and SARB-approved. Its dedication to the highest levels of service has resulted in a long list of awards, most recent of which includes winning the Top Securities Broker 2022 for South Africa accolade from Intellidex. In addition to offshore transfers and foreign exchange solutions, Rand Swiss provides its clients with the following: online trading, private broking, managed portfolios, retirement planning, structured products, and tax-free savings accounts. The Rand Swiss head office is based in the JSE Building, in Sandton, Gauteng.