Today’s business and IT leaders are seeking to overcome unprecedented challenges. To accelerate with the growth of data. To optimize staff and budget resources. To protect and secure data. To reduce costs and carbon emissions. And to do it all outside of the traditional data center — transforming IT to drive success in multiple clouds and at multiple edges, at scale. Dell Technologies helps you execute on your goals for AI-driven innovation, automation and zero-trust security with Dell PowerEdge servers that are purpose built, intelligent and cyber-resilient to accelerate transformation anywhere. Click here and we will contact you today. Business and IT leaders today are faced with more challenges than ever before. Data is growing at astronomical rates and proliferating rapidly outside of the core data center, at an increasing number of multicloud and edge deployments. Continued adoption of advanced workloads, such as artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML), high performance computing (HPC) and virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI), adds operational complexity as these demanding use cases become mainstream. IT complexity leads to higher operating expenses and a greater risk for errors and unplanned downtime. Cyberattacks continue to grow, threatening your intellectual property, your customers’ and employees’ privacy and your business. And throughout it all, technology companies are stepping up to the challenge of advancing sustainability to fight global climate change. To succeed, you need to blaze a path toward transforming operations. Doing so will help you gain faster insights to become more competitive. It will help you tighten data security to better protect the business and your customers. It will help you build a greener data center to enhance sustainability while driving down energy costs. And it will improve operational efficiency to further reduce IT costs and complexity. Accelerate transformation anywhere Dell Technologies brings to bear all our expertise in building servers toward helping you pursue new opportunities in non-traditional areas at the edge, at scale, with solutions built for AI and new verticals. Years of experience helping organizations of every size and from every industry have resulted in a carefully honed suite of products, designed to meet the varied needs of our vast customer base. As you expand your transformation focus from the data center to driving additional value at the edge, at scale, leveraging insights from anywhere, Dell Technologies is driving advancements in server technology to help you address these changes. Our latest PowerEdge server portfolio introduces new, accelerated platforms to support your expanded needs, whether they are at the core, at the edge or at scale. All are backed with industry leading security and systems management. PowerEdge server capabilities answer needs across all industries, helping you find new operational efficiencies by deploying AI and ML at the core. For example, financial services institutions can use PowerEdge servers to run banking operations and high frequency trading, drug companies can perform research and bring new drugs to market faster, scientists can forecast weather and geological events and save lives, global companies can support remote work using VDI, and much more. Throughout it all, Dell Technologies is providing the horsepower to do the complex computations to create AI models so that businesses of all sizes can harness its power. This requires multiple sockets and GPUs. And to cool these hotter servers, we offer smart cooling capabilities to improve energy efficiency. PowerEdge servers enable you to go beyond your boundaries, removing obstacles to excellence by designing servers specifically for edge environments. For example, Dell PowerEdge Rugged servers fit into smaller spaces and keep performing in environments prone to extreme heat or cold, dust, shock and vibration. This makes them ideal for telco outposts, factory floors, construction sites, retail locations, mobile command centers and other extreme environments. PowerEdge offers servers built with essential features and configurations that easily scale. Ordered through the Hyperscale Next program, these scalable servers deliver technology optimization without the financial and operation burden of supporting extreme configurations. Cloud service providers (CSPs) can gain access to hardware and validated workloads that provide faster deployment of common IT applications giving them the power to scale at their own pace. These servers can be the answer to open ecosystem environments with optional Open Server Manager built on OpenBMC to simplify management across large scale multivendor SaaS, PaaS and IaaS data centers. Whatever you plan to use them for, PowerEdge servers and solutions are specifically designed and optimized for new workloads, such as AI/ML, edge and telecom, while answering emerging thermal and environmental challenges. They are designed to deliver the right combination of technologies on the right platform for the right outcome. Every server comes with intuitive tools that work together to deliver automated, repeatable processes based on your individual policies, enabling effortless management. And they are built on cyber resilient architectures that incorporate security at every phase of the product lifecycle, from the silicon root of trust and supply chain to deployment and asset retirement. Power your journey to what’s next with servers that empower people to focus less on infrastructure and more on turning their ideas into competitive advantage. Designed to help your business and our planet Choosing products and solutions with sustainability at the core helps reduce your carbon footprint and protects against rising energy costs. At Dell Technologies, we put sustainability at the core of everything we do, with products and solutions designed to reduce emissions and energy use while maximizing performance. Don’t wait to accelerate AI driven innovation, automation and zero trust adoption with PowerEdge servers that are purpose built, intelligent and resilient. Click here and we will contact you today. Let Axiz help you power your journey.