Microsoft and Mecer Inter-Ed are running the MEA Partner Skills Academy (PSA) – an integrated technical skilling program that helps individuals validate their expertise with a Microsoft role-based certification. This co-invested program is delivered through learning partners for selected top Microsoft partners, and targets those who demonstrate their skills on the job every day and are ready to take the next step. Click here to register for your Microsoft exam prep sessions. For a limited time only, and on a first-come first serve basis, Emerald packages are free for Microsoft South Africa partners. (T’s and C’s apply) Your organisation should consider taking advantage of this amazing opportunity for three key reasons: Increase your internal skillsets on Microsoft technology.
Gain more Microsoft Certified professionals.
Build points toward the Microsoft Cloud Partner Program (MCPP) The courses available through the MEA PSA aim to help partners skill their employees and progress towards achieving their Solutions Partner designation within the new Partner Program. Thanks to the MEA PSA, this can be done using pre-arranged partner prices that are solely available through its South African program. Those who take advantage of this great opportunity will get access to the PSA platform, which has a dedicated MCPP program tab with guidance per solution designation, certifications that need to be achieved, and scoring guidance. You can choose between three technology pillars: This is the top package and includes the full array of learning resources you will need to achieve your next Microsoft certification. You will join an instructor-led class experience with one of our Microsoft Certified Instructors, who will take you through each module and lab step by step. You can ask questions and get answers straight away, and will also have unlimited access to the online PSA Platform. You can use this platform to go through the course content on your own time. This is also useful for class preparation, or if you want to review a module or section after your class is finished. To support your instructor-led classes, you will receive all the necessary support tools to succeed in your certification journey. These include: Full instructor-led course with a Microsoft Certified Trainer.
Your hosted online Lab access (Practice exercises).
Your MCP voucher (exam voucher) – South Africa only.
MeasureUp practice test to practice your knowledge before attempting the exam. The Emerald package is a self-paced package option where you will have unlimited access to the online PSA Platform and can experience the course content on your own time. To increase the effectiveness of the training content and your experience, you will have access to: PSA Platform access with MS Learn courseware at your fingertips.
Your MCP voucher (Exam voucher) – South Africa only.
MeasureUp practice test to practice your knowledge before attempting the exam. The Bronze package is a self-paced package option where you will have unlimited access to the online PSA Platform and can go through the course content at your own time.  Mecer Inter-Ed is currently offering two opportunities to Microsoft Partners: For a limited time only and on a first-come, first-serve basis, Emerald packages are free for Microsoft South Africa partners. This is subject to the following terms and conditions: Role-based certifications only.
Limited to South Africa.
Exam completion by 31 March 2023.
Max packages per partner – 5.
Click here to take advantage of this great opportunity. Mecer Inter-ed will run exam prep sessions free of charge for Microsoft Partners. These prep sessions are led by a Mecer Inter-Ed Microsoft Certified Trainer and will teach you more about the exam objectives. Your trainer will also delve deeper into each objective by doing short quizzes to test your knowledge, and they will help you learn about exam techniques for a successful outcome, too. Click here to register for these exam prep sessions. Here’s how to sign up to the MEA PSA learning platform: Navigate to ​the PSA Learning Platform:
Select “Register/Sign in” – which is situated at the top right-hand corner of the screen.
Create an account by choosing to register.
Enter your details along with your company MPN ID (Please email suritadp@mecerintered.co.za if you get an error on your MPN ID).
Check your emails for a confirmation email and follow the prompt to update your password.
Navigate back to the PSA Learning Platform: https://meapsa.com/sa
Start exploring the PSA. We trust you will enjoy your PSA learning journey through MIE. If you have any additional questions from an operational or sales support perspective, please send an email to PSA@mecerintered.co.za.