The Poplar, Horizon Capital Residential’s newest boutique apartment block, features Horizon Capital’s signature marks of contemporary design, timeless quality, and environmental consciousness – with spectacular, panoramic views as a unique finishing touch. Click to access the brochure, pricelist, and floor plans. The Poplar is designed to be the epitome of exclusive living and will provide you with the penthouse lifestyle you want, surrounded by everything you need. The three flagship penthouses have it all – Oggie Oak flooring, air-conditioning, integrated appliances, heated towel rails, and private rooftop swimming pools with unobstructed views of Cape Town’s iconic locations. Penthouse 501, for example, boasts a generous 75sqm entertainment terrace and pool deck, with spectacular mountain, city, and sea views.  With excellent security, secure parking, contemporary design and magnificent views, The Poplar apartments are ready for you to live in luxury or rent them out when it suits you. Nature on Your Doorstep. The apartment mix at The Poplar is as follows: 1 one-bedroom garden apartment

81sqm


4 one-bedroom apartments

38sqm – 46sqm including a terrace


6 two-bedroom apartments

67sqm – 74sqm including a terrace


3 exclusive penthouses, all with private pools

132sqm – 165sqm including terraces This provides a range of options to pick the apartment that best suits your needs. Whichever apartment you choose, you will benefit from the following: Panoramic views of Table Mountain, The City of Cape Town, and the sea
Secure parking, CCTV, access control and electric fencing
Fibre internet connectivity
Lift access to apartments
Pet and short-term letting friendly
Full back-up power
Water-efficient fittings
Low-voltage LED fittings
Floor-to-ceiling aluminium and glass sliding doors  The Poplar comprises 14 luxurious apartments in a boutique block priced from R1.85m (including VAT and no Transfer Duty). Enquire NOW “Regardless of which apartment you make your own, one thing is guaranteed: you’ll enjoy the best of the city from every side of the building,” said Managing Director of Horizon Capital Residential, David Sedgwick. “The Poplar has been orientated and designed so that every unit has a breath-taking view, thanks to floor-to-ceiling windows and sliding doors, which flood the spaces with natural light and maximise the spectacular vista of some of Cape Town’s most iconic locations.” “This is penthouse living for everyone.” Located at the foot of Table Mountain in Vredehoek, one of Cape Town’s most popular suburbs, The Poplar is your link between the vibrancy of urban city life and the majesty of nature. Vredehoek is a neighbourhood full of character and entertainment, and as a resident of The Poplar, you will be a stone’s throw away from the following shopping, leisure, and business amenities: 180m to Courage Coffee Mobile Bar
850m to Gardens Shopping Centre
450m to Herzlia Schools
450m to Deer Park Café & Deli
950m to De Waal Park
1.7km to Kloof Street
3.8km to Lion’s Head
3.8km to V&A Waterfront
6.5km to Camps Bay Beach Horizon Capital Residential focuses on designing and developing high-quality residential buildings that meet the practical needs of future owners and generate excellent capital growth over time. The buildings represent a commitment to conscious living, crafted with mindful intent to create spaces that suit the modern lifestyle and enhance the neighbourhood context.  Construction is expected to commence in 2023, with completion and occupation anticipated in Q3 of 2024, allowing investors to benefit from the capital gain until transfer. To view the pricelist, marketing floor plans and development brochure, visit www.ThePoplar.capetown or email sales@horizoncapital.co.za for further enquiries.