Many roads and freeways in Gauteng are expected to be heavily congested this week as people return to the province from holidays. Arrive Alive and the Gauteng Traffic Police are calling on motorists to exercise caution on certain roads and to comply with rules and regulations to avoid any incidents. The traffic police said that the following major routes and freeways are expected to experience high traffic volumes: N1 Polokwane to Pretoria
N1 Bloemfontein to Johannesburg
N4 Rustenburg to Pretoria
N4 Emalahleni to Pretoria
N12 Emalahleni to Johannesburg
N3 Durban to Johannesburg
N12 Potchefstroom to Johannesburg
R573 Pretoria Moloto Road Over 100 road fatalities have been recorded already over the festive season period in the province, Arrive Alive said. The Gauteng Traffic Police said that the following road safety tips should be followed to avoid any incidents: Motorists are advised to switch on their headlamps to enhance visibility on the road.
Pedestrians should cross the road only when it is safe or allowed by a road traffic sign to do so.
Passengers using public transport should not carry large luggage with them, which may obscure the driver’s vision.
Public Transport Operators must refrain from continuously driving on the yellow lane on the freeway as it is illegal and endangers other road users.
Overspeeding and unsafe overtaking must be avoided at all times. Sello Maremane, the spokesperson for the areas traffic police, said: “The Gauteng Traffic Police urges road users to comply with road safety rules and regulations to avoid unnecessary crashes resulting in fatalities.” “Road crashes and fatalities contribute to the alarming rate of disabilities and deaths in the province. This is largely attributed to the attitude and behaviour of road users, such as unsafe overtaking, unsafe lane changing, overspeeding, pedestrian jaywalking and lack of concentration by drivers. Substance abuse and vehicle fitness have also compounded the situation on our roads,” said Maremane. “The Gauteng Traffic Police will be on high alert as part of the integrated law enforcement plan to deal decisively with any form of road traffic violations such as drunk driving, reckless and negligent driving, speeding, jaywalking, freight overloading and roadworthiness,” added the spokesperson. The Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) reported on 20 December 2022 that since the start of the festive season 1 December, over 2,000 motorists had been arrested nationwide for driving offences. Statistics from the group showed that 2,241 motorists had been arrested for drunken driving, high speed, driving without licences and violation of permits -among other things. Read: Manual vs automatic – which is more fuel-efficient