Former FNB CEO, Michael Jordaan and SARS Commissioner Edward Kieswetter will take their respective hot seats in the upcoming Think Big webinar series, hosted by PSG. The innovative thinkers are the latest South African thought leaders to be selected by PSG to share their insights on some of the country’s most pressing issues. The virtual series, which has captured the interest of thousands of digital attendees since its inception in 2020, is currently hosted by award-winning journalist, Alishia Seckam. Click here to learn more about the Think Big Webinar Series. Previous speakers have included the likes of Oscar-winning and globally acclaimed, South African-born actress, Charlize Theron and, more recently, former South African President, Kgalema Motlanthe. PSG’s Think Big series has taken its place as a leading digital platform for debate and discussion on an array of topics that concern all South Africans. Preceding webinars have covered ground in politics, gender equality, banking, technology and innovation as well as the complexities of the current geopolitical climate. 24 January 2023: As the former CEO of FNB and the current founder of investment firm, Montegray Capital, he remains involved in the 5G data network rain, chairs mobile bank challenger Bank Zero and is chairman of the largest venture capital fund in South Africa. In his discussion with Seckam, Jordaan will explore the future of digital banking and telecoms in South Africa, drawing on over three decades of experience in multiple sectors. 7 February 2023: Edward Kieswetter, Commissioner of the South African Revenue Service (SARS) will shed light on what lies ahead for SARS now that it has emerged from the shadows of state capture allegations. Talking points will include the use of AI in taxpayer profiling to international collaboration when it comes to South African taxpayers’ obligations. Think Big webinars are open to all members of the public and are free to attend. Previous recordings are available via PSG’s YouTube channel. Book your virtual seat for the upcoming discussions: Tuesday 24 January 2023: 10H00 – 10H30 Speaker: Michael Jordaan, Founder and CEO of Montegray Capital
Topic: The future of digital banking and telecoms in South Africa
Click here to Register Tuesday 07 February 2023: 10H00 – 10H30 Speaker: Edward Kieswetter, Commissioner of the South African Revenue Service
Topic: The future of taxation in South Africa
Link to Register More information on the series is available here. Affiliates of the PSG Konsult Group, a licensed controlling company, are authorised financial services providers. www.psg.co.za