Fujitsu today announces the launch of its next-generation PRIMERGY M7 servers leveraging the new 4th gen of Intel Xeon Scalable Processor Platform technology. Offering best-in-class performance and energy efficiency on industry-standard CPU technology, the PRIMERGY M7 series provides the simplicity and cost profile needed for backbone operations as well as the power to bring affordable AI operations within reach for sustainability transformation programs. Click here to learn more about Fujitsu’s new PRIMERGY M7 server. Demonstrating their flexibility, Fujitsu will put M7 series servers straight to use at its AI Test Drive facility, part of Fujitsu’s DX Innovation Platform. The Test Drive helps business people prove an AI business case by overcoming the biggest stumbling block data scientists often face — finding the hardware and the necessary environment to run a test before committing resources. It is free to use and provides a complete package of computing power — including the top-of-the-range 8-socket rack server PRIMERGY RX8770 M7 — as well as network capacity, open-source tool tweaking, plus the support that AI-inquisitive business users need to evaluate a viable business case. Fujitsu’s new PRIMERGY M7 server portfolio offers a choice of Intel CPU technology and the more specialized and higher-cost GPU (Graphics Processing Unit) approach that has been common in AI until recently. PRIMERGY M7 servers open up CPU-based AI operations thanks to innovations such as the Intel Distribution of the OpenVINO Toolkit, which simplifies deep learning inference deployment for hundreds of pre-trained models. As a result, CPUs and the software libraries that run on them have evolved to become much more capable of taking on deep learning tasks. And CPU-based systems are generally simpler and more robust, for example, in edge environments, where their lower power requirements are more appropriate. Fujitsu PRIMERGY M7 systems will be available globally from the end of March 2023 with the RX2530 M7, RX2540 M7 and TX2550 M7. Other models (the Fujitsu PRIMERGY RX4770 M7, RX8770 M7, CX400 M7, and including the two node CX2550 M7 and CX2560 M7, and the GX2560 M7) will be available in due course. For pricing, contact local Fujitsu offices and partners.