South Africa is failing to realise its economic and social rights due to increasing inequality and unemployment, exacerbated by widespread corruption and fallout from the pandemic, says Human Rights Watch (HRW). In its latest World Report 2023: Events of 2022, HRW reported that the country has failed to take concrete steps to ensure the rule of law, police conduct and human rights – among other things – are maintained. Instances of corruption, failure to reach environmental targets, and political instability have left a bad taste in the mouth of foreign investors, with many flagging political instability, corruption and inequality as key detractors in the country. The country has been hit with several high-profile cases of corruption in the upper tiers of government. From the widely exposed state capture saga and the severely delayed trial of former president Jacob Zuma for fraud, corruption, money laundering and racketeering – to more recent events around current president Cyril Ramphosa. Ramaphosa has been embroiled in a scandal since July 2022 regarding his failure to follow proper procedure in reporting the theft of large sums of dollars stashed in the couches of his Phala Phala game farm. According to Momentum Investments, political challenges – like the aforementioned – have a direct and impactful effect on the country’s overall economic outlook. In December, when reacting to the market shake-up caused by Ramaphosa’s scandal, Busi Mavuso, the CEO of Business Leadership South Africa (BLSA), said that in the future, all foreign stakeholders should be ensured that government institutions and civil society can remain robust and capable despite political infighting or instability. The Bureau for Economic Research (BER) also reported that the political climate of South Africa is a major obstacle to investment, with 83% of manufacturers in the country citing the political climate as a concern. According to the Word Economic Forum’s (WEF) latest Global Risk Report, local business executives have also listed political issues and potential state collapse as a result of compounding crises among the biggest fears for the year ahead. The WEF’s report analysed 12,000 business leaders from 121 countries – South Africa is one of only three countries to have a state collapse as the biggest perceived risk facing the country. The rule of law The country’s rule of law has also come under question, with Zuma’s corruption trial suffering frequent delays, HRW said. “One of the reasons for the delays was caused by his appeal in June (2022) to the Constitutional Court against the Supreme Court’s dismissal of his special plea to remove the lead state prosecutor, Billy Downer, whom he accused of lacking independence and impartiality,” said Human Rights Watch. “The Pietermaritzburg High Court was supposed to resume the trial of the case on October 17 but postponed the trial to January 2023 to allow the presiding judge to consider whether he should still be on the case,” said the group. HRW added that the ex-president has also taken aim at journalists for allegedly publishing documents containing his medical information without the permission of the National Director of Public Prosecutions, and has also turned this attention to Ramaphosa himself, trying to privately prosecute the standing president as an accessory after the fact. Police Members of the South African Police Services continue to violate rights with little accountability, reported HRW. Cases of police misconduct include the acquittal of four police officers in the killing of a bystander shot during student protests at the University of Witswatersrand in March 2021. In a separate case in August 2022, the Independent Police Investigative Directorate announced an investigation into an incident captured on video footage of police officers assaulting an unarmed man in the Western Cape, reported HRW. Further failures The government’s efforts to curb xenophobic violence have also yet to yield tangible improvement in the protection of migrants, added the group. “Anti-foreigner groups perpetuate the unsubstantiated notion that foreigners are responsible for unemployment and crimes in the country. Women and members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and intersex (LGBTI) community continue to face abuses, including murder, assault, and harassment.” Human Rights Watch is an international non-governmental organisation that conducts research and advocacy on human rights. It was founded in 1978 and is headquartered in the US. The organisation focuses on issues such as civil and political rights, economic, social, and cultural rights, and international humanitarian law. It publishes reports and conducts investigations into human rights in countries across the globe. Many of South Africa’s founding civil liberties and human rights are enshrined in the Bill of Rights as part of the country’s Consitution. Rights include freedom of expression, equality, and the right to education, healthcare, and property. It also prohibits discrimination based on race, gender, sexual orientation, and other factors. The Bill of Rights is considered one of the most progressive in the world and has been cited as a model for other countries. Despite its standards, there are various instances of it being infringed. Read: Hammer blows for consumers in South Africa keep coming