The Trinityhouse Matric Class of 2022 –– have faced all challenges of a post-Covid world to achieve results that inspire all. Their resilience, perseverance, and grit are to be congratulated, as they achieved a 100% pass rate despite facing ongoing global social and economic upheaval. Click here to find out how Trinityhouse equips learners with the tools for success. This year’s Matric results see Trinityhouse Little Falls learners achieved 95 distinctions in total, with 95% of the class earning Bachelor’s Degree passes. This is an exceptional achievement for this campus, which is in its tenth year of existence and is still growing into its full capacity and only had 60 candidates in this year’s cohort. By contrast, 25-year-old Trinityhouse Randpark Ridge and its 110 candidates garnered 219 total distinctions – an average of 2 distinctions per Grade 12 learner at this campus, as well as a 93% Bachelor’s Degree pass rate. When asked about their Matric year, the Trinityhouse Matric Class of 2022 enjoyed a challenging, invigorating year and are excited and optimistic to take on whatever the future holds. It’s the firm foundation they’ve been given through the Trinityhouse schools’ traditions, teaching philosophies, and pursuit of excellence that have played a part in this. Dylan Billings not only attained full academic colours by Grade 7, but he also achieved the highest mark in Grade 12 in the subject of Computer Application Technology. He foresees global success on the horizon. “Trinityhouse Little Falls has pushed me to my full potential not only as a student, but as a young adult as well.” “The 2022 prefect body and the Class of 2022 reignited the spirit on campus post-Covid, which was one of my main highlights of the matric year!” “Trinityhouse encouraged a perfect balance between Christianity, academics and sport.” “I am planning to study in Pennsylvania, USA, to pursue my dream of becoming a Certified Public Accountant and a professional soccer player through college soccer.” Deputy Head Girl of Trinityhouse Randpark Ridge, Nina Swart, was named Dux Scholar for 2022 – and she earned it by achieving an amazing 10 distinctions! She is planning on pursuing a B.Eng. in Data Engineering at Stellenbosch University. “To be a Trinitonian for more than 12 years of my life has been the greatest blessing.” “I can safely say that I enjoyed every single part of my Matric year (excluding finals of course) and I thank God for blessing the Wolves of 2022 with memories we will hold in our hearts forever,” she says of her Matric year. Here are the 2022 Trinityhouse Top Achievers – we are proud of them and cannot wait to see how they tackle the future: Nina Swart Lauren Bowman Max Naude Jordan Dunne Sheldyn Haikney Jennifer Le Roux Rene Mogohloane Connor Davies Piper Tewson Jenica Jacobs Samantha Maasdam Sange Yenana Savannah Braun Camryn Cheetham Megan Grobler Nathan Le Roux Morgan McClintock Liahna Moodley Timae Puckree Miguel de Freitas Alicia van Blomestein Jade du Plessis Jonathan Kalonji Lisa Smith Find out more about how Trinityhouse’s equips learners with the tools for success here.