For any contact centre manager, there are three problems that will sound very familiar – frustrated customers, high agent turnover, and expensive licenses. Zailab has addressed these by offering a cloud-based, omnichannel, AI-driven platform that boosts success rates, agents love it, and it’s very affordable. Now a leading contact centre solution, the platform brings all the necessary features under one roof. Click here to see the services offered by Zailab. The solution was launched in 2015 by South Africans who saw a gap in the market, after implementing call centre operations in the banking sector. Zailab’s popularity has risen rapidly in recent years, with  South African companies embracing cloud-based systems to support their remote and hybrid working systems. Zailab is now the trusted contact centre platform of many top South African enterprises involved in sales and customer services, thanks to the superior functionality it offers across all popular channels. This includes: Voice
SMS
Email
Webchat
WhatsApp It also offers a broad range of valuable services and features that help your customer service professionals provide the best possible assistance to your clients at all times. For example: they replaced the traditional ‘one-in-one-out’ system with an intelligent ‘Waiting Room’, making sure that valuable interactions are prioritised to the most appropriate agent, while keeping a firm hold on SLA times. There are many more valuable Zailab features that your business can benefit from, including: Multiple Dialler Options
Historical and Live Reporting
Quality Assessment
Interaction Logs
Intuitive IVR Designer
Voice Recording
Post-Call Options
Speech Analytics
Easy Scalability
Agent Management
Flexible Pricing Models
Workforce Management Additionally, Zailab makes it easy to manage your customer service team. The platform collects extensive data about each professional’s performance and converts this into valuable insights. The platform boasts full level-1 PCI/GDPR compliance and a 99.9% uptime record, too, so you don’t have to worry about regulatory concerns and reliability. When you are ready to start using Zailab, its dedicated team of support specialists will help you through the implementation process and can assist you with any questions or queries. In fact, these specialists are so qualified and competent, they can help you get your contact centre equipped with Zailab in under a week. With its innate understanding of the South African market, and massive roster of features and services it offers, Zailab is an ideal choice if you’re looking to upgrade the capabilities of your contact centre. Click here to see the services offered by Zailab.