AM.CO.ZA, a leading provider of CNC machines in South Africa, has launched SoftwareTraining.co.za – your best source of free and informative videos about CNC machine software. The company launched this valuable library of resources after seeing many of its clients struggle to perform certain tasks with their CNC machine software. Click here to watch quick and free tutorial videos at SoftwareTraining.co.za. It noted that these clients did not need to learn every feature of the software they were using but rather the specific functions that solved their particular challenges. This is why Software Training library hosts lots of short videos that each provide concise and simple instructions for solving your different challenges. “We have sold a lot of CNC machines in the South African market over the past 10 years – so we understand the struggles our clients are facing,” said AM.CO.ZA. “Business people are always busy – so we started SoftwareTraining.co.za to provide short and free videos that solve their problems quickly and effectively.” SoftwareTraining.co.za publishes its videos in a mini-series format so users can pick out tutorials about their specific challenges and don’t have to waste time consuming information they don’t need. For example, there is a mini-series that focuses on setting up a logo and converting it to a Bitmap file format so that it can be added to a Print Job report. This mini-series includes step-by-step videos on how to use different tools to convert your logo into the Bitmap file format. These tools include Photoshop, MS Paint, GIMP, and CoreIDRAW. There is an additional video that explains how you can then take the Bitmap file and add it to your Print Job report. If your challenge is converting your logo to a Bitmap file format, you can choose your preferred image editing program and watch its tutorial video – ignoring the other videos. Alternatively, if you have already converted your logo to a Bitmap file format and just want to learn how to add this file to your Print Job report, you can skip all the conversion videos altogether. Click here to watch this tutorial. These videos are great resources because AM.CO.ZA is a trusted name in the South African CNC cutting and large-format printing solutions industry. It stocks a wide range of top brands and offers machines, spare parts, and consumables – all of which are available through its Buythis online store that is AI-driven and distributes countrywide. AM.CO.ZA also runs Machine dot Africa to offer on-site installations and factory repairs, as well as Ambitious Academy – providing training and certification to AM.CO.ZA clients. Click here to watch quick and free tutorial videos at SoftwareTraining.co.za.