Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Ending load shedding a top priority for the ANC:  President Cyril Ramaphosa says that load shedding, corruption, and crime will be tackled in 2023, as these issues are damaging the image of the ANC. Speaking at the ANC’s birthday celebrations, Ramphosa says that Eskom and the ANC have to find urgent solutions to fix load shedding – such as returning additional units to generate more power and hiring world-class professionals into executive management. [News24] Petrol tax hikes coming soon: Although South Africans were treated to a fuel price decrease last Wednesday, Efficient Group founder and chief economist Dawie Roodt says South Africans should prepare for an increase due to a tax hike. Roodt expects the fuel price to go up from March, as the finance minister, Enoch Godongwana, will likely increase the fuel levy during his February meeting [Daily Investor] ANC members to face disciplinary action: Newly-elected ANC Deputy President Paul Mashatile says ANC members implicated in the State Capture Commission report will face the party’s internal disciplinary processes. 97 members of the ANC are implicated in the state capture report. According to Mashatile, the new ANC leadership is committed to reinvigorating the party. [EWN] Police to investigate Gauteng road incidents: JMPD spokesperson Xolani Fihla says a case of reckless and negligent driving will be opened about a diesel tanker that crashed on the N12 highway – two weeks after 34 people were killed in the Boksburg blast. Police have also launched a search to find a driver of a BMW who allegedly killed seven pedestrians – including three children. [TimesLive, TimesLive] Markets: The rand strengthened slightly against the US dollar but remains above R17.00/$. The rand will likely remain volatile in the short term as developing markets continue to sway due to news coming out of the United States, as the risk of global recession remains. On Monday (9 January), the rand was trading at R17.06/$, R18.21/€, and R20.71/£. Brent crude is trading at $79.42 a barrel.