Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: ANC push for a state of disaster: The ANC wants a national state of disaster declared to tackle the ongoing electricity crisis. President Cyril Ramaphosa said that the electricity crisis threatens national security, the economy, and the country’s sovereignty. A state of disaster would allow Eskom to shorten standard procurement procedures, which could cut down the amount of time that the embattled power utility needs for maintenance and refurbishment. [Mail and Guardian] Transnet looks for a partner: Transnet wants to outsource the management of its container corridor between Durban and Johannesburg for the next 20 years. Transnet said that it lacked the funds to make the business feasible. A successful partner will likely need over R5.5 billion in capital and will be expected to take on over 3,500 staff members and the corridor’s assets, including 419 locomotives. [Business Insider] No eye on the tiger: The SPCA says it wants proof of the safety of the tiger spotted in the Edenvale area of Gauteng on Monday after a local security company reported that the tiger was captured and taken to a sanctuary. Residents in the area are still advised to take precautions and keep their pets inside. It is the second tiger to get loose in the province, after Sheba the tiger escaped from a farm in Walkerville a few weeks ago. [TimesLive, EWN] Phalatse gunning for DA leadership: Despite being ousted as Johannesburg Mayor in a vote of no confidence last week, Mpho Phalatse will compete against John Steenhuisen to become the DA’s new leader. Phalatse said that her decision to join the race was due to the ANC’s mismanagement of the country. She added that the DA must promote meritocracy instead of tokenism when selecting a new leader. [News24] Markets: South Africa’s rand weakened on Monday ahead of a slew of domestic economic data due this week. Local investors will be looking at money supply and trade balance figures for December, as well as the purchasing managers’ index survey for January by S&P Global, for clues on the health of the economy. On Tuesday (31 January), the rand was trading at R17.42/$, R18.90/€, and R21.50/£. Brent crude is trading at $84.85 a barrel. [Nasdaq]