MTN Group’s new strategic alliance with Microsoft is set to have a major impact on the South African SME sector. Click here to learn how the MTN Group and Microsoft partnership can help your SME. This sector continues to experience strong growth and has increasingly relied on technology to achieve this – particularly given how the pandemic changed the business landscape. Research by Xero has found that two-thirds of small business owners say technology became more critical to them since the pandemic began. This research also found that over half of all South African SMEs have adopted cloud technology in the last two years, and almost a third of all respondents said technology has helped them reach new customers or expand into new areas. Microsoft is a key provider of market-leading, technology-based SME solutions – including Microsoft 365, Microsoft Teams, and its Microsoft Azure cloud service. These industry-leading solutions play a key role in many South African SMEs and the strategic alliance between MTN Group and Microsoft promises to expand both the reach and effectiveness of these solutions locally. This is thanks to MTN Group’s position as a top telecommunications provider in South Africa – giving it access to new areas of the SME market that stand to benefit from Microsoft’s ICT solutions. By combining this impressive reach with Microsoft’s market-leading solutions, the strategic alliance serves as a big step forward for the South African SME sector. The strategic alliance will also see Microsoft providing extensive training and skills development support to MTN Group’s technical teams. This will allow these professionals to provide better service to all of MTN Group’s SME clients. Additionally, MTN Group and Microsoft have noted their intent to work together on joint projects – leveraging each party’s strengths to provide superior solutions for their clients. “At MTN Business, we pride ourselves on guiding our clients to better outcomes through the provision of the best solutions and unrivalled technical expertise,” said General Manager: SME and Indirect Channels at MTN Business, Songezo Masiso. “Our partnership with Microsoft will help us to achieve all of this and much more, and this will ultimately bolster the South Africa economy through an improved SME sector.” If you are interested in equipping your SME with the best Microsoft business solutions, click here to learn more.