A motorist was caught driving at 191km/hour in a 120km zone, on the 8th of December N1 route to Bloemfontein in the Free-State, The Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) reported that this was one of over 2,000 arrests across the country for various driving offences since the start of the festive season on 1 December. During the festive season in South Africa, roads are often more congested as people travel to visit family and friends. Motorists are urged to be cautious and to follow the speed limits to ensure the safety of all road users. Speeding in the country can lead to serious accidents and can result in fines and points on your license. Statistics collected by the RTMC showed that 2,241 motorists had been arrested for, among other things, drunken driving, high speed, driving without licences and violation of permits. According to the RTMC, law enforcement agencies have remained on high alert and have conducted more than 188 roadblocks in which 611,000 vehicles were stopped and checked. Over 100,960 traffic fines have been issued. Drunk driving has been a leading cause of arrests, with 324 motorists being detained. Despite public calls for a zero-tolerance towards drunk driving, public affairs head at the Automobile Association, Layton Beard, says that the current threshold of 0.05g/100ml is a good indication of intoxication. South Africa’s current limit of 0.05 grams per 100 millilitres is already in line with the international standard of the World Health Organisation. Beard said that the main issue on South African roads is the lack of enforcement. The RTMC found that the highest alcohol arrest was in Gauteng, between Lever and New Road in Midrand. The corporation said that the suspect’s alcohol reading was 3.99mg/100ml. “Evidence shows that some motorists continue to operate unroadworthy vehicles on public roads placing the lives of other motorists at risk. More than 4200 vehicles have since been discontinued from operating,” added the RTMC. The RTMC spokesperson Simon Zwane told Newzroom Afrika that major violations are still occurring, particularly in KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and the Western Cape. There’s reckless and negligent driving, a high number of public transport drivers driving without proper permits, taking passengers into areas where they are not permitted, and in some cases, the cars were impounded, said Zwane. He said a sizeable number of arrests had been made for those with previous traffic fines. Looking forward to 2023, Zwane said that more arrests would be made for those who have been issued fines but are pulled over and found not to have paid them. “Today (3 January), we might see the last peak in traffic volumes; we have seen the first wave of people coming back on the 27th of December and the 2nd of January – which was another peak,” added Zwane. Read: Take extra care on these major routes and freeways in Gauteng this week