The South African Reserve Bank (SARB) has announced a 25 basis point hike, taking the current prime lending rate to 10.75%. This recent hike marks the ninth rate hike since the current hike cycle started in November 2021, totalling 375 basis points over the period. Samuel Seeff, the chairman of the Seeff Property Group, said that while a rate hike is never welcome news, it was largely expected and factored in by the property market. Regarding the residential property market, Seeff also shared a semi-optimistic outlook stating that despite the accelerated rate hikes since mid-2022 and the expected slowing in sales volumes, the market still ended the year on a solid foundation and entered 2023 with a degree of stability. Seeff said that there is no doubt that the higher interest rate will weigh on the market with fewer buyers; however, the market is also set to remain stable with good activity. “We are still seeing strong support from the banks with mortgage lending remaining favourable for the market,” he said. Bond provider BetterBond said that although homeowners will need to pay a bit more on their monthly bond repayments, the good news is that South Africa could be heading for the peak of the current rate cycle. As a result, interest rates could start to stabilise in the coming months and hopefully drop towards the end of this year, it said. The SARB acted swiftly in curbing inflation by starting as far back as November 2021, said BetterBond. This could be one of the last hikes for a while, it added. “Inflation – down again in January to 7.2% from 7.4% in December – appears to have stabilised here as in many global markets, including the US, where there is some expectation that the Federal Reserve may now halt rate hikes as a reprieve to the economy,” said Seeff. He added that global energy prices have seemed to settle alongside the rand, and at the very least, the interest rate should now stabilise. “Hopefully, it seems that we could perhaps again start seeing the rate come down towards the latter part of the year.” The table below shows how much more you pay for your bond repayments today compared to the last hike.