DocFox is hosting a free online webinar explaining how Accountable Institutions can ensure they are fully compliant with the Financial Intelligence Centre Act (FICA) in 2023. The webinar is titled “New to FICA: What Now?” and will take place on 15 February at 10:00. Click here to sign up for the free DocFox FICA compliance webinar. DocFox is holding this webinar to assist businesses who are unsure if they are classified as an Accountable Institution or have just found out that they need to comply with the FIC Act. As part of South Africa’s bid to stay off the greylist, the past few months have seen various changes being made in the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating Terrorism Financing (AML/CFT) space. This includes recent amendments, such as Cash Threshold Reporting requirements and the inclusion of new Accountable Institutions under the FIC Act. All High-Value Goods Dealers who sell a single item for R100 000 or more (such as motor vehicle dealerships and dealers in precious metals and stones)
Trust and Company Services Providers
Credit Providers subject to the NCA
Crypto Asset Service Providers
The South African Mint Company
Money or “Value” Transfer Providers The “New to FICA: What Now?” webinar is a free one-hour session that will provide details on whether your business is classified as an Accountable Institution under the new FICA amendments. It will also cover what steps you can take to ensure your business is fully FICA-compliant, as well as several other key topics: The new Accountable Institutions which need to comply with FICA.
What it means to be FICA-compliant.
The seven steps Accountable Institutions must follow to ensure they are fully FICA-compliant.
The most common areas of non-compliance.
The consequences of non-compliance. To find out more about these topics and ensure your business is on the right side of the law, sign up for the webinar. You can join from any PC, Mac, iPad, iPhone, or Android device, and a certificate of attendance will be sent to delegates that join for at least 45 minutes. Click here to sign up for the free DocFox FICA compliance webinar.