Temenos recently held a webinar titled “Modernizing your bank’s payments capabilities” that provides valuable information about the provision of financial services in South Africa and the MEA region. “Payments is an exciting and dynamic market that is creating new challenges and opportunities for banks across the region.” “Whether you are a start-up operation looking to build a profile in payment processing, or a long-standing incumbent needing to keep up with market initiatives and customer demands, the rapidly changing landscape will have an impact on your business.” “Temenos has experience working with the region’s top banks and payment disruptors and we are delighted to bring together this expert panel to share key insights with the industry,” – William Moroney, Managing Director – Middle East and Africa, Temenos. Click here to watch the Temenos webinar. This information is relevant at a time when financial institutions are experiencing major disruptions to their payment businesses due to several external factors – including new market entrants, technologies, and regulations. Each of these factors forces online payment providers to embrace new ways of facilitating better customer experiences, including support for wearables, biometric security, and contactless technology. As a leading provider of digital payment solutions, the Temenos webinar provides insight into the state of the payment industry – allowing financial institutions to be better equipped to embrace future-focused strategies and implement cutting-edge technologies. This webinar covers various important topics in the payments industry, including open banking, APIs, instant payments, and cross-border payments. Leading experts will also answer the biggest questions currently facing the region’s payments business: What are the biggest payments trends in the MEA region?
How can you develop increased process efficiencies and enhanced service innovations?
What is the winning strategy to streamline all payments and enable STP? The webinar also begins with a keynote presentation by Sujatha Venkatraman, Payments Product Director at Temenos. This presentation focuses on payment modernisation and why it is a winning strategy for innovation and growth. Additionally, you will watch an interactive panel discussion focused on how financial institutions can build bolder payments strategies. This panel will be chaired by Venkatraman, and features: Elias Ghanem – Global Head of Capgemini Research Institute for Financial Services
Alaa Alrousan – Regional Account Director at Swift
Mohit Gupta – VP for Cross-Border Services in the EMEA region at Mastercard Click here to watch the Temenos webinar.