There’s no better reason to dress up and celebrate life with a new year and new you, of course, a few dress-the-part fashion pieces never go amiss either. Right?! Click here for more information about Edgars If you’re only just getting over holiday withdrawals, and the joy of being on a blissful vacation for two weeks seems like a memory. Do not panic. With the best back-to-work fashion trends, there’s plenty to add to your wardrobe to create an impact and make you feel like the fashion guru you are. There is no time to lose, no time for daydreaming. The new year has arrived and it’s time to ramp up your wardrobe drama. Step ahead and step out with looks that make you feel chic, comfortable and joyful. So much can be achieved with clever fashion hacks and your own intuition. The days of pencil skirts, all-in-one suits, high heels, and stiff shirts are so over. Today’s office look is all about less structured formal dressing and a tribute to clothes that can be worn to work that are practical, functional, and interchangeable, from work to playtime. Think comfort while keeping your look polished. Getting ready for work today is more about having fun and expressing yourself in a way that reflects your taste, style and life. There’s nothing sassier than a pair of wide-leg jeans and a blazer. Pair a black and white striped ensemble, or a floral blouse with muted trousers. These looks are effortless, chic, and easily accessorised with a heel or flat and your favorite bag. As much as we loved being forced into lockdown, (not) and home alone in our comfy sweats with fluffy bunny slippers. We have to say a teeny tiny thank you. Have you noticed how some of these quarantine looks have become acceptable in the office? Try leggings or anything with a slight stretch. Lycra isn’t only worn for those sweat-inducing gym sessions. Grab a pair of leggings and pair them with a puff-sleeve top. Let’s remember how stuffy and airless or snowcap-freezing offices can be. To circumvent this, always keep a jacket on the back of your chair. Look for a neutral colour or denim that can be paired with different looks easily. Explore how chic elasticated pants can be by pairing them with a long coat and bodysuit. If you’ve been out of sync with current fashion must-haves, invest in a blazer now. There’s a timelessness to this classic piece that makes it comfortable and on-trend. Wear a blazer with a bodysuit and pair it with wide-leg trousers. If your goal is to look chic and still feel comfortable, try a matching suit. Power suits can be worn at speaking engagements, conferences, and new client meetings, showing you just how versatile they are. Even more exciting is that these suits can be matched with different tops to diversify your look. Belted dresses are a top must-have for the summer office look. Wear it with a gladiator block heel or favourite flat. If your office vibe is more conservative, finish your look with a blazer. Of course, no fashion season would be complete without colour. After the dullness of winter, it’s time to step into the rainbow. Look to dresses, trousers, t-shirts and jumpsuits in bright pink, lilac and mint green. From lilac to deep velvet purple, you’ll see a delightful spectrum of purple tones across fashion wear and accessories. Denim is back. In fact, this season’s trend is all about denim on denim. Nothing could be sexier. Enjoy denim crop tops, bikinis, stylish skirts, or a classic denim jacket. Make space in your capsule wardrobe for this classic, versatile, and undeniably gorgeous trend. The beauty of denim is being able to dress it up and dress it down. If you adore a dress, look for laser-cut style. They are ideal for parties, cocktail events, weddings, and beach parties. A little reveal of the body always emulates a feeling of romance and liberty. Whether you are dancing under the stars or enjoying a sunset overlooking the Atlantic Ocean with friends, dresses give an ensemble movement and a sweeping drama. If you’ve made your list of new year’s resolutions, let’s hope you’ve not forgotten the most important point, a new wardrobe. When you dress the part, you feel like a fashion god/dess and there’s nothing to beat that. It’s certainly time to address the need for balance and best-trend fashion tips with a little individual fashion flare to tailor your look. Style and glamour are all about in 2023. Always dress to spark that inner joy and you’ll have far more fun at work and everywhere else. Click here for more information about Edgars