FNB’s mobile network offering was recognised with joint first place for “Digital MVNO (Mobile Virtual Network Operator) of the Year” at the global MVNO Awards. Revealed at the MVNOs World Congress 2022, the award is a glowing endorsement of FNB Connect, which has seen it harness FNB’s world-class digital and gamification platforms to bring helpful and cost-effective telecommunications to customers. Click here to learn more about FNB. “We’re extremely proud to have received this global recognition for our businesses’ positive impact on the lives of our customers,” says Jacques Celliers, CEO of FNB. “We fundamentally believe that both financial services and telecommunications are crucial to enabling customers to realise their dreams and aspirations. Our ability to facilitate this in a trusted manner remains essential as we continue to transition from a digital offering to an even bigger aspiration as a platform-based business.” FNB launched their mobile network offering in 2015, following more than two decades of innovation within the telecommunication space from the early days of inContact, Cellphone Banking, device distribution, and airtime top-up solutions on their banking platforms. “We approach telecommunications in the same way that we respond to our customers’ financial needs. Leveraging our digital capabilities allows us to innovate and support our digitally active customer base with integrated telecommunications solutions that improve access and are helpful, easy, and safe.” “This year alone, data usage grew more than 100%, and we awarded customers with more than 750 million megabytes of free data,” concludes Celliers. But it is not just about our own mobile network offering. We’re also greatly increasing our efforts to democratise access to affordable third-party smart devices, data, and airtime packages, thereby narrowing the digital divide. Among the popular third-party services on our digital platform are software vouchers that individuals and business customers can purchase via the FNB App. All purchased software vouchers are stored within the app and can be redeemed at the user’s convenience. With so many unique and world-leading innovations, FNB continues to set itself apart as a leading digital-age company. Its approach to telecommunications within a financial services platform creates powerful customer experiences that go beyond banking.