Retail giant Pick n Pay has launched a new pick-up point for Takealot customers in a Cape Town store as part of an ongoing pilot for the collection of non-food online orders while shopping for groceries. The in-store service pilot was launched just before Christmas last year in Pick n Pay Table Bay Mall – reaching collection capacity within two days, highlighting the potential of the new concept. Pick n Pay said that it aims to increase the in-store collections per day due to high customer participation and will add more stores to the pilot in the coming weeks. “We aim to run the pilot for three months to gauge the value it provides customers, but the results after two weeks are already very promising,” said Ansgar Pabst, a head of general merchandise at Pick n Pay. Takealot customers can pick up the majority of their orders, with the small exception of very large appliances. The retailer says that the service is operational during store opening hours, and customers can reserve a collection day. This venture could improve online inclusivity for millions of customers thanks to Pick n Pay’s extensive and far-reaching network of over 2,000 stores. “We are thrilled to be piloting our first Takealot Pickup Point in Pick n Pay. We see it as a great way to create more convenience for our shoppers by offering them a hassle-free, fast way to pick up their Takealot orders while shopping for groceries in Pick n Pay”, said Frederik Zietsman, Takealot.com CEO. Pick n Pay said that is has evolved its stores beyond a traditional grocery store, allowing for them to be placed to pay bills, RICA a SIM card or even bank. Pick n Pay entered into a commercial services agreement with the Takealot Group last year to scale its on-demand delivery with Mr D. In addition to its newly launched Pick n Pay Home online store; Pick n Pay also offers more than 500 general merchandise products on Takealot. The new on-demand grocery and liquor shopping experience – PnP Groceries delivered by Mr D – officially launched to customers in October 2022 and has already been rolled out to over 300 stores with incredible success. Read: Takealot under pressure