The recent 18.65% electricity hike by the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa) has cemented Cape Town’s plans to move away from its reliance on Eskom for electricity. On Thursday (12 January), Nersa approved an 18.65% increase in electricity price for 2023, with another 12.74% hike in 2024 for the failing national power utility Eskom. Cape Town mayor Geordin Hill-Lewis said the price hike was unfair, unaffordable, and unjust, adding that the city plans to reduce its reliance on Eskom’s unstable and increasingly unaffordable electricity by buying power on the open market. The city said the second phase of its independent power procurement would get underway in February 2023. Alongside more affordable power for the Cape Town grid, it aims to provide load shedding protection over the next three years. Cape Town is aiming to end load-shedding over time through various means, including: Buying power on the open market, with the second phase of its major IPP procurement due to be announced soon
Paying businesses and residents to sell power back to the city
Incentives for voluntary energy savings under a new Power Heroes programme
Municipal generation projects such as Steenbras Hydropower, solar PV, and gas turbines “While the City is working to bring down the cost of electricity for Capetonians by procuring electricity from cheaper sources than Eskom, we need Eskom and Nersa to treat South Africans fairly.” “The price of electricity has risen more than 500% over the past 16 years, far exceeding inflation over that time. As prices were hiked, supply became less reliable.” “We will continue to oppose Eskom’s unjust price hikes by all available means while accelerating Cape Town’s path away from Eskom reliance,” said Hill-Lewis. The mayor said that South Africans are being asked to pay for corruption and mismanagement at Eskom. He noted that the company has other options when it comes to raising funds rather than price hikes, including: Reducing its bloated payroll
Cutting suppliers who are over-charging, especially for sub-standard coal
Ending corruption
Recovering state-capture loot Disaster centres On 11 January, the City opened its Disaster Operations Centre to mitigate any potential impact of indefinite load shedding in the area. When power trips in the city, critical infrastructure fails, sometimes resulting in even longer periods of blackouts. The centre allows for better coordination with relevant authorities in the area to deal with issues of safety and security, infrastructure failure, service delivery and economic stabilisation. Cape Town has been gearing up to break up with Eskom for a while; projects and initiatives have been underway since last year, with a major focus on independent power producers. Read: Cape Town and Joburg on high alert as all-day stage 6 load shedding hits