When buying or selling a property, it is crucial that you have all the important data at your fingertips. Lightstone makes this possible through its property reports, which provide access to its extensive range of in-depth data-driven property insights. Click here to purchase a Lightstone property report that suits your needs. These reports are ideal for home buyers and sellers, as well as those who want to invest in a new property, as they give you important information that will influence your purchasing and selling decision. We tested Lightstone’s property reports and detailed the results below. After signing up for an account in a few simple steps, we were ready to test the Lightstone property reports. It was incredibly easy to get the reports we wanted – all we had to do was visit this webpage, select “Buy Now” for the report type we were looking for, and enter the details of the property we wanted a report on. There are several ways to search for the report you want – including the owner’s ID number, the address of the property, or the sectional title name. All of these searches are conducted and executed in a manner that complies with the POPI Act, as Lightstone takes data privacy very seriously. The reports you receive are incredibly affordable, too – it currently costs just R135 excl VAT to buy the Property Value Seller Report, or R100 excl VAT to purchase the Property Value Insights Report. To test Lightstone’s reports, we chose a property and went through its Property Value Seller and Property Value Insights reports. These reports both provided impressive amounts of data on the property in question: We have embedded sample versions of both of these reports below. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start"></span> <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span><span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start"></span> What stood out to us with both of these reports was their sheer depth. They provide insights and data that we hadn’t even thought to consider when looking at the purchase or sale of a property. Even if you’re involved in the property industry, it is unlikely that you have the depth of data that Lightstone offers. There are many other reports, too, and we’re confident that you can find all the information you’re looking for on Lightstone. When buying or selling a property, you are dealing with one of the major decisions in your life, purchasing or selling a house, and this is a high-value assets, it is really important that you always do your full due diligence. Lightstone is the perfect platform for this type of research, and we have no doubt it will help many users save themselves from sub-par purchases and sales. If you’re considering buying or selling any property, we strongly recommend Lightstone – so click here to purchase a Lightstone property report that suits your needs.