South Africa is home to world-renowned fine-dining restaurants – with most charging over R1,000 per meal per person. According to the World’s 50 Best Restaurant List (they also include 51-100), Cape Town-based Fyn is the 37th best restaurant in the World – and the best in Africa. Fyn – pronounced fain – has a Japanese-inspired menu and sources its ingredients from local Cape Town farms. The restaurant serves dishes such as Ostrich egg chawanmushi, Guinea fowl wonton, and Outeniqua springbok. Another Cape Town restaurant, Le Colombe, ranks 56th in the global rankings and serves modern French-meets-Asian cuisine. Paternoster-based restaurant Wolfgat also makes the list coming 90th – dropping out of the top 50 and losing its 2021 crown as the best restaurant in Africa. The best restaurant in the World is Geranium, located in the Danish national soccer team’s stadium in Copenhagen. The restaurant has a seasonal tasting menu that includes 20 meatless dishes. Copenhagen retains the crown for having the best restaurant after three-Michelin-star Noma’s victory in 2021. However, Noma has recently announced that it will close after allegations of a toxic workplace culture. Despite being ranked as the best restaurant in Africa by the World’s 50 Best Restaurants Awards, Fyn did not receive a 3-star restaurant rating at the 2022 Eat Out restaurant awards – instead, being given a 2-star rating. Le Colombe and Wolfgat were both given a 3-star rating by Eat Out’s judges. Le Colombe’s sister restaurant, the Pier Restaurant in Cape Town, also received the accolade, and so did another Cape Town restaurant, Salsify at the Roundhouse. The LivingRoom at Summerhill Guest Estate outside of Durban was crowned Eat Out’s 2022 restaurant of the year. 2023 expectations South Africans are expected to shift and seek out convenience meals and takeaways in 2023 due to adverse economic conditions, with a global recession expected to occur. After the Covid-19 lockdown significantly improved delivery services across the country, a greater takeaway culture also exists in South Africa. However, fine-dining establishments are expected to remain resilient despite the dire economic conditions. Writing on Bizcommunity, Ryan Cole, head chef at Salsify at the Roundhouse, says that after the Covid-19 pandemic, people are eager to “come out and value experiences more than ever.” He adds that restaurants will invest more time, money, and energy into creating exceptional culinary experiences, with a further focus on African identities in food. The best restaurants in South Africa are as follows: Fyn Location: Cape Town City Centre, Cape Town.
2022 Accolades: 37 in World’s 50 Best Restaurants
Most Expensive Menu: Dinner Menu Experience
Price: R1,675 p.p  La Colombe Location: Constantia, Cape Town.
2022 Accolades: 56 in World’s 50 Best Restaurants and Eat Out 3 Stars
Most Expensive Menu: Chef’s menu and Vegetarian Chef’s Menu
Price: R1,795 p.p.  Wolfgat Location: Paternoster, Western Cape.
2022 Accolades: 90 in World’s 50 Best Restaurants and Eat Out 3 Stars
Most Expansive Menu: Seasonal Tasting Menu.
Price: R1,050 p.p.  Pier Restaurant Location: V&A Waterfront, Cape Town
2022 Accolades: Eat Out 3 Stars
Most Expensive Menu: Chefs Experience
Price: R1,795 p.p  Salsify at the Roundhouse Location: Camps Bay, Cape Town
2022 Accolades: Eat out 3 Stars
Most expensive Menu: Chef’s Menu
Price: R1,650 p.p  The LivingRoom at Summerhill Guest Estate Location: Pinetown, eThekwini.
2022 Accolades: Eat out 3 Stars and Restaurant of the year.
Most expensive Menu: seven-course menu
Price: R925 p.p  Prices do not include wine and service charges. Read: Big shift hitting restaurants and fast food in South Africa.