Sustained load-shedding has been a severe drain on the manufacturing sector in South Africa, new data shows. Recent data from Absa’s latest Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for December 2022 – in collaboration with the Bureau for Economic Research (BER) – showed that despite a slight rise in PMI to 53.1 from 52.6 in November, the underlying picture of the sector is mixed. Absa said there is weak momentum in the business activity index – dragged by persistent load shedding. “The business activity index ended the year on a weak level. In fact, barring the first three months of 2022, the index has failed to rise above the neutral 50-point mark through the year,” added the bank. In December, Absa reported a business activity index of 45.2, down from November (49.5) and October’s reading (48.8). The Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) is a leading indicator of economic activity in the South African manufacturing sector. The index measures the activity level of purchasing managers in the manufacturing industry, with a value above 50 indicating an expansion of the sector, while a value below 50 indicates a contraction. In South Africa, the PMI is closely watched as a critical indicator of economic performance and can provide insight into future business conditions and trends. As indicated by Absa and BERs previous findings over the September 2022 period, when heavy load shedding was underway- both business activity and the number of new sales orders plunged. Manufacturing takes a hit Key findings from Statistics South Africa (StatsSA) reveal that manufacturing production as a whole decreased by 1.1% in November 2022 – indicating the first monthly decline in the manufacturing sector after a four-month-long upward trend. This was also during the time of record levels of load shedding in the country. The largest negative contributors included food and beverage production (-2.5%), wood and paper products (-4.5%), petroleum, and other chemical products (-2.5%). According to StatsSA, the largest positive contributor to production and sales was the motor vehicle industry, which grew 13.4% year on year.  Read: Load shedding pushed to stage 6 – here’s the new schedule