Cape Town homeowners are warned to brush up on the market value of their properties as the 2022 municipal valuations of their homes will open for public inspection and objection on 21 February 2023. The general valuation roll is conducted every four years to adjust the rates residents pay for their homes. These new rates will come into effect from 1 July 2023. In light of the coming general valuation roll, the regional head of Pam Golding Properties in the Western Cape, Basil Moraitis, said homeowners must make themselves aware of the market value of their property as of July 2022. “This will ensure that the values determined by the city of Cape Town reflect a reasonable market value of your property,” he added. According to James Phillipson of STBB, the software used by the city to evaluate a property is called CAMA (Computer-assisted Mass Appraisal). This software is used in many cities worldwide, including Cape Town. CAMA is applied by assistant municipal valuers, statistical analysts and data collectors to arrive at a valuation. “As most of the revised valuations are conducted by a computer-aided mass appraisal system, errors and irregularities may occur, so it’s advisable to familiarise yourself with the new valuation as soon as you are notified of it by the city,” said Moraitis. If you discover an irregularity regarding your property’s valuation, Moraitis added that there is a 60-day objection period from 21 February to 30 April 2023. “Should you not agree with the city’s valuation, it is best to submit your objection as soon as possible, and it’s advisable to obtain professional assistance in compiling, motivating and lodging your objection,” he said. Moraitis added that a reputable professional would ensure that your objection meets all the stringent requirements of the city valuers and who can also undertake a subsequent appeal should your objection not be satisfactorily concluded. He also noted that the city levies no rates on the first R300 000 of the value of residential property – comprising R15 000, which by law the city is not allowed to levy on, plus a reduction of R285 000 as approved by Cape Town City Council. Property owners are reminded that if the city valuers identify a property as having undergone renovations, they are legally allowed to inspect it physically, said Moraitis. For security purposes, any temporary or permanently employed data collector and municipal valuer can be identified by name, photograph and city identification number, which are available on the city’s official website. To ensure you are informed timeously of the city’s valuation of your property, you can keep an eye on the City Municipal Valuations Roll, which is also readily available on the city’s website. Read: Property law changes planned for 2023 – 4 important bills to keep an eye on