Discovery bank has launched a new feature for its app, allowing customers to book domestic and international flights at a discount through Vitality Travel. The bank said that the new offering allows members to find and book flights instantly and will also incorporate discounts and rewards when they fly with a partner airline. Clients of Discovery Bank can get between 10% and 75% off local flights, as well as flights from Emirates, British Airways and Qantas flights when booking via Vitality Travel, it said. Discovery noted that global spending on travelling has increased to pre-Covid levels. The Vitality Travel Platform also offers discounts on accommodation and car hire bookings on the app, while the Discovery Banking app will also offer an immediate credit limit increase when booking flights, the group said. Customers can filter airlines, cabin class, fare type, stop, and length of a flight when booking a flight and pay via a Discovery Bank card or Discovery Miles. The app will also manage identification information for the traveller and offer the ability to view and share travel itineraries that update in real-time. 2023 flight Discounts will likely be of some relief for travellers, as airline prices have risen dramatically over the last couple of years. Speaking to Newzroom Afrika in December 2022, Aviation expert Desmond Latham said that several domestic and international factors have drastically changed the dynamics of air travel, which will likely continue until 2024. Latham said that the price hikes had increased by over 300% from 2019 to 2022, with A1 jet fuel rising from $1.80 a gallon in 2019 to $3.30 a gallon in 2022. He added that a lack of airline personnel, including pilots, resulted in staff being paid more by simply pitching up to work. In addition, a lack of aeroplane parts compounded expenses. South Africa’s local airline industry has been under pressure since the liquidation of Comair led to massive capacity constraints. While other airlines have moved to add more capacity to local flights, the process is slow. Things are expected to improve gradually in 2023. Despite the economic headwinds, Latham said that airlines are still financially successful due to the laws of supply and demand, as travellers are still willing to travel despite the increases. Read: This is what a R100,000 first-class flight looks like – departing from South Africa