Power utility Eskom says that it will be moving to lower stages of load shedding this weekend. Stage 4 load shedding will continue until 05h00 on Saturday, after which it will be reduced to stage 3. The utility hopes to downgrade load shedding to stage 2 on Sunday during the day, but stage 4 will continue in the evenings. A further update will be published on Sunday afternoon or as soon as any significant changes occur, it said. Friday, 27 January Stage 4: until 00h00 Saturday, 28 January Stage 4: 00h00 to 05h00
Stage 3: 05h00 to 16h00
Stage 4: 16h00 to 00h00 Sunday, 29 January Stage 4: 00h00 to 05h00
Stage 2: 05h00 to 16h00
Stage 4: 16h00 to 00h00 Monday, 30 January Stage 4: 00h00 to 05h00
TBD: 05h00 to 16h00  Since Thursday, a generating unit each at Camden, Duvha and Tutuka power stations have returned to service while the return of a generating unit at Matla Power Station has been delayed. A generating unit each at Duvha, Grootvlei and three units at Kriel power stations have suffered breakdowns. Planned maintenance is currently sitting at 6,482MW while breakdowns currently amount to 15,848MW of generating capacity, the group said. Eskom is struggling with a highly volatile and unpredictable grid, which has resulted in several changes and escalations to the load shedding schedule this week. South Africans should expect the load shedding stages to fluctuate at short notice for the foreseeable future. ANC secretary general Fikile Mbalula on Friday announced that president Cyril Ramaphosa and the national government were working on an “emergency package” of measures to mitigate load shedding – details of which are expected to be revealed in the coming week. Parliament, meanwhile, has ramped up its oversight of Eskom and its board, engaging with the executive and labour over the last two days trying to understand the reason for the prolonged and elevated stages of blackouts. The matter is complex. According to CEO Andre de Ruyter the utility has been hit by the perfect storm of issues. On top of the well-reported challenges to the group’s coal fleet, the power utility has had to address the refurbishments and upgrades of the Koeberg Nuclear Power Stations, critical failures at Kusile and Medupi, as well as the lack of liquidity and constrained finances at the company that prevent it from operating things like the open-cycle gas turbines (OCGTs). De Ruyter stated unequivocally that “if (Eskom) had more money for the OCGTs, the stages of load shedding would be reduced”. Despite the ongoing challenges, the CEO hinted that there was light at the end of the tunnel. He said that the current recovery plan foresees 1,862 megawatts being restored to the grid by the end of March 2023 – roughly the equivalent of two stages of load shedding. Meanwhile, 6,000MW of capacity should be coming online over the next 24 months. However, the group needs skills, money and time for this to work. Schedules For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Business owners in South Africa are looking to emigrate to escape Eskom and load shedding