The 2022 matric results have been approved by the quality assurance body Umalusi, taking the results one step closer to being released. During a media briefing on Monday, January 16, the chairperson of the association, Yunus Ballim, said that the results had been greenlit after being administered by the Department of Basic Education and the Independent Examinations Board. Umalusi initially requested an extension to the release date for final marks and has now confirmed the latest results in light of looking into cheating scandals. Umalusi said that Angie Motshekga, the basic education minister, will announce the results on January 19 – meaning that learners could fetch their results early in the morning of January 20. The department has stated that matrics will have until February 3, 2023, to request a remark or recheck of their exam papers. If they wish to retake the exams or improve their results, the next opportunity will be in May/June 2023. “Learners have until February 8, 2023, to register for the May/June 2023 exams and until March 15, 2023, to register for the October/November 2023 exams, according to the department,” added the department. Last week, basic education minister Angie Motshekga dismissed the myth that you can pass matric with 30%. She stressed that in 2022, as with years before, learners must pass at least three subjects at 40%. How to get your results Learners can access their results (or register to receive them) in the following ways: Learners can get their results directly from the schools or institutions where they took the exams. These results may only be accessible after 12:00 PM on the release day. Learners can also access their results directly by logging onto the Department of Basic Education’s website here. Before receiving confirmation of their registration, candidates will need to complete a two-step verification process. They will need to provide their 13-digit ID number and Exam Number to register. The DBE website can be accessed without data charges, meaning it can be accessed regardless of whether the user has data or not. A number of online news websites will publish the results – including News24’s Matric Results page or the Sowetan’s page. To receive their 2022 matric results, learners can text their exam number to 45856. The system will verify their exam number and then send them their results. Each SMS costs R1.50, and free SMSes cannot be used. Learners can receive their matric results by using the USSD code *120*45856# and entering their exam number to register. The learner’s matric results will then be sent to their phone once they are available. The USSD service will be charged R1.50 per minute. Download the MatricsMate App for free from Google Play and Apple App Stores. Most of South Africa’s major daily newspapers will publish the matric results on 20 January 2023. Read: South Africa’s ‘30%’ matric pass mark controversy – this is how the system works