Top ANC officials are reportedly losing patience over president Cyril Ramaphosa’s constant delays in reshuffling his cabinet, saying that government departments are being stymied and ministers are neglecting their duties. Two separate reports from City Press and The Sunday Times have highlighted the growing frustration. Ramaphosa is set to reshuffle his cabinet to appoint new ministers to positions that are or will soon be vacant, while analysts speculate that several other ministers are on the chopping block for their political manoeuvring against the president or failure to make it into the ANC’s top decision making body at its last elective conference. Confirmed positions that need replacements include: The transport minister, as incumbent Fikile Mbalula is now ANC secretary general, a full-time position;
The public services and administration minister, a position that has been vacant for a couple of years;
The deputy president, after David Mabuza announced his resignation; and
The new minister of electricity, announced by Ramaphosa during his State of the Nation Address. Other positions that may see changes include the tourism portfolio, due to the increasingly antagonistic incumbent Lindiwe Sisulu, and CoGTA, after minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma openly defied the party line and voted with opposition parties to have an impeachment process launched against Ramaphosa. However, despite these – and possibly more – positions coming into focus, the president has been in no rush to make the changes. Analysts had initially expected him to announce cabinet changes before the SONA, but this was pushed back to after the address. Now, the latest is that the reshuffle will happen sometime after the Budget Speech, or before the end of the month. According to ANC insiders speaking to City Press, however, the various departments that know or have an inkling that changes are coming are frozen in wait, while their ministers are ‘hands-off’ and neglecting their duties. Insiders said there is a sense of anxiety and confusion among government departments over the delay, especially as new MPs have been sworn in to fill positions, and those on the out – such as Mabuza – have already clearly stated they no longer want to be in government. The constant delays also completely contradict Ramaphosa’s stated sense of urgency when dealing with the country’s electricity crisis. The president announced the position of a minister of electricity to deal with the crisis, but is now seen waiting weeks to appoint someone to the role. Meanwhile, businesses and South Africans at large continue to sit in the dark for extended periods at a great cost to the economy and livelihoods, safety and security. Countering these claims, another insider told the Sunday Times that the situation was complex and not normal, making it difficult for the president to address. They said the SONA was a focus on the power crisis; the cabinet reshuffle and replacement of the deputy president were two separate issues – and the announcement of the minister of electricity could be an announcement all on its own. In all cases, the president has to tread carefully and consult widely, and can’t rush the process. Energy minister is coming The new minister of energy is a sticking point for many. According to City Press, head of infrastructure in the presidency Kgosientso Ramokgopa is the president’s preferred candidate for the role. However, the position’s mere existence has faced widespread criticism and backlash for triplicating political leadership roles around energy – with Mineral Resources and Energy and Public Enterprises already in the mix with governing power utility Eskom. Ramaphosa has not been deterred by the opposition, however. Responding to the debate on his latest State of the Nation Address (SONA) this week, the president said that the new minister will assume full responsibility for overseeing all aspects of the electricity crisis response, and that government is “shifting into gear” to end load shedding. “The minister will be responsible for driving the various actions being coordinated by the National Energy Crisis Committee to end load shedding as a matter of urgency. “The reality is that the resolution of the energy crisis requires effective coordination across several departments and public entities,” Ramaphosa said. He said this requires the undivided attention of a political principal who does not need to split their time and energies among different important responsibilities. “This appointment will ensure that there is a minister who is ultimately responsible for resolving load shedding and who is able to work with all fellow cabinet ministers, departments and entities to do so,” said the president. In response to critics who said the minister would cause confusion, fragmentation and a turf war between ministers, Ramaphosa said that this is not the case. “The Minister of Electricity will be focused day in and day out only on addressing the load shedding crisis, working together with the management of Eskom and the board. The Minister will be leading the National Energy Crisis Committee and interacting with all other departments in the spirit of cooperative governance,” he said. Read: Ramaphosa’s new ‘electricity minister’ is coming whether you like it or not