The South African Revenue Service (SARS) has been very successful in its tax enforcement measures across South Africa, and the National Treasury is set to give it more money to fund its assault on non-compliance. During the national budget speech on Wednesday (23 February), finance minister Enoch Godongwana praised the successes of SARS over the last three years. Godongwana revised tax revenue collections for 2022/23 to a total of R1.68 trillion. This exceeds last year’s budget estimates by R93.7 billion and the 2022 medium-term budget policy statement estimate of R10.3 billion. He said: “The improvement in revenue is due to the higher collection in corporate and personal income taxes and in customs duties. This partially offset the lower value-added tax estimates.” “Our country is reaping the benefits of a more efficient and effective tax administration, that is, building trust to increase voluntary compliance and boost revenue collections,” the minister said. Speaking to EWN, the commissioner of SARS, Edward Kieswetter, said that to date, over R3 billion has been recovered from tax fraudsters. He added that for the first time in 15 years, revenue exceeded non-interest spending. SARS is further focusing its investigations on both taxpayers and syndicates, added Kieswetter. Tax Consulting SA said that despite there being no increase in personal income tax rates for 2023/24, the taxman is still focused on a small pool of taxpayers. Meanwhile, the major issue of government overindebtedness is not being addressed through increased tax revenue collections. “SARS’ revenue collection was ahead of its own projections, which alone does not address the steadily increasing debt burden,” it said. “We are simply not making sufficient progress in resolving this issue.” Tax Consulting SA said that the government’s reliance on personal income tax is still concerningly high, as it has been for years, with an ever-decreasing tax base. By Kieswetter’s own admission earlier in February, the country lost over 6,000 taxpayers to emigration in 2022. “Unfortunately, this means that there being no increase in the personal income tax brackets will not decrease the burden on wealthy taxpayers,” said Tax Consulting SA. “In addition, SARS is anticipated to strengthen oversight measures in respect of these individuals to improve collection.” The firm said that provisional allocations had been set aside for the improvement of SARS’ revenue-collecting capacity, with a direct allocation for its capital and information and communication technology projects. Summarily, the new proposals set forth in this year’s budget do not necessarily bode well for the country in the short- to medium-term. With many of the measures introduced being geared at minimising the strain on taxpayers across different segments of South Africa, perhaps taxpayers are somewhat happy with what they have heard in the budget. Nonetheless, it seems that the government is still treating the symptoms rather than the disease, the firm said. Tax brackets In light of the latest budget speech, finance minister Enoch Godongwana adjusted the applicable personal income tax brackets. Tax brackets are expected to be fully adjusted by 4.9% – providing some relief to South African taxpayers. The minister further noted that adjusted in terms of inflation, the tax-free threshold has been pushed from R91,250 to R95,750. From a fiscal policy standpoint, Godongwana did not institute any major tax proposals in the budget.  Read: How much you will be taxed in South Africa in 2023 – based on what you earn