Vanilla Payroll is an affordable solution that helps South African companies save time, reduce errors, and simplify tax compliance. Click here for a Free trial and big discount Its robust features are therefore ideal for businesses that want to simplify their payroll and tax management – which can be time-consuming and take resources away from valuable business growth opportunities. SPECIAL 20% DISCOUNT OFFER – email us today at hello@vanillapayroll.com or caren@vanillapayroll.com Even better news is that Vanilla Payroll is easy to implement for both SME owners that manage payroll themselves and larger companies with accounting teams. It is simple to install, and its user-friendly interface makes it easy for your team to adopt and hit the ground running. From there, Vanilla Payroll will make your payroll management process quicker and easier thanks to its built-in intelligence that reduces working time and margin for error. It does this by simplifying and automating monthly and year-end tasks, so you never have to worry about missing important deadlines. This ensures all employees are paid accurately, on time, and with no fuss – increasing the happiness of your workforce and avoiding awkward situations. Vanilla Payroll also helps you remain tax compliant by simplifying the year-end submissions process. The solution is SARS compliant and as a member of both the South African Payroll Association and The Payroll Group of South Africa, Vanilla Payroll will enable you to satisfy financial regulations and tax laws. Furthermore, Vanilla Payroll is continuously updated to ensure it is always up to date with government legislation, the latest regulations, and all SARS requirements. This tax simplification has major time-saving benefits, too, meaning you won’t miss any tax-related deadlines in the future.  Click here for a Free trial and big discount Vanilla Payroll is so confident in its product that it is currently offering a free three-month trial of its payroll service. Included in the trial is the free support that comes with Vanilla Payroll, which ranges from technical help and training, to educating payroll administrators on how to use the software as efficiently as possible. Call us on 0861 000 661 or 068 200 3727 before 10 March 2023 to receive the SPECIAL 20% DISCOUNT with your FREE three-month DOWNLOAD. To benefit from this promotion, use the reference BUSSTECH20 when placing your order. There has never been a better time to begin your Vanilla Payroll journey.