Discover a world of refined luxury at The Braemar, a contemporary boutique development in the heart of magnificent Green Point, on Cape Town’s Atlantic Seaboard. With fifty-one stylish apartments including nine elegant duplex penthouses showcasing Italian minimalist architecture, it is the epitome of sophisticated living. Apartments on offer include one beds, two-beds, and two & three-bed duplex penthouses. One Beds (37sqm – 51sqm)
• Priced from R2,12 – R3,22million Two Beds (67sqm – 100sqm)
• Priced from R3,57 – R5,57million Duplex Penthouses (129sqm – 181sqm)
• Priced from R6,62 – R8,32million *All apartments come with parking included in the purchase price, valued at R250,000 per bay – 2 beds and penthouses are allocated 2 bays each. Click here to Discover more about The Braemar  “Named after the street it calls home, The Braemar is a smart investment in prime luxury-real estate and has everything you as an astute buyer need to lease out or live in, it’s the dream Cape Town lifestyle of comfort, adventure, peace, elegance and convenience.” says Alistair Capon, co-founder of Mason Developments. From the grand arched entrance, chic foyer and glistening residents pool, to the exclusive penthouses with expansive private terraces, every aspect of this five-storey marvel, speaks of elegance and sophistication. The Braemar also offers 24-hour security and concierge service, and cutting-edge facial biometric access control for residents’ peace of mind. Mason have also sweetened the deal by including secure parking bays in the apartment purchase price, valued at R250,000 per bay. Sales launch online for The Braemar on 15 March 2023 at 1pm The interior design has a warm and minimalist aesthetic, with a focus on natural materials, and a sophisticated, uncluttered lifestyle which was inspired by the beauty of the Cape Town landscape, incorporating its colours and textures into the design.  Short term rental forecasts at The Braemar make it a thoroughly appealing investment opportunity for buy-to-let investors. Set one road back from the Main Road in Green Point, the tranquil location of The Braemar, offers residents a peaceful escape from the city with easy access to local eateries, shops, restaurants, parks and beaches. Green Point is also home to the iconic Green Point Stadium and has just played host to the inaugural ABB FIA Formula E World Championship race. Residents can embrace an active lifestyle in Green Point Park, jog along the seaside promenade, explore cycle lanes, and soak up the sun and scenery at world famous beaches like Clifton and Camps Bay all within easy reach of The Braemar. Sales launch online on 15 March 2023 at 1pm
Launch day buyers receive a R150 000 discount
Estimated completion in Q4 2024
High short term rental projections
High capital growth area
51 luxury apartments
○ One Beds from R2,12 million
○ Two Beds from R3,57 million
○ Duplex Penthouses from R6,62 million Residents swimming pool
24hr concierge & security
Parking included in every purchase
Visitor parking bays
Backup power via generator
Optional extras
○ Electric vehicle charging stations
○ Backup power solutions
○ Airconditioning
○ Storerooms  South African developers, Mason, known for their acclaimed developments in Sea Point (The Glengariff), Vredehoek (The Belair, The Bradwell), and Constantia (Olde Cork Farm, Brounger Walk, and Bannerman Close Estate) thoughtfully harness form, function and elegance which gives way to meaning and joy for residents. For more information and enquiries, please visit thebraemar.co.za or contact Cheronne on cheronne@mason.co.za  