South African President Cyril Ramaphosa and Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma say South Africans should not be anxious over the state of disaster that was announced yesterday, 9 February. Speaking to 702, Dlamini-Zuma – whose department heads the state of disaster response – said that South Africans should not be anxious about the state of disaster, as it only intends to shorten the length of load shedding, not limit people’s rights. She added that the state of disaster intends to handle issues that cannot be easily addressed with the current legislation. The state of disaster will allow the state to bypass red tape that previously halted progress, according to the minister. Dlamini-Zuma also said that load shedding affects multiple parts of society, including food and water security, necessitating the extreme measure. Meanwhile, Rampahosa said that the newly announced electricity minister will work with Eskom’s board and management on a “hands-on” basis. Ramaphosa said that the minister will be rooted in his office, as the people of South Africa have given him the responsibility of fixing load shedding. He added that criticism over the state of disaster is misplaced and that all South Africans should rather focus on load shedding. Speaking to eNCA, the president rejected the notion that the state of disaster could create a “super presidency” by placing everything within or under the office of the presidency. He said that the centre of government is the presidency, and it is the responsibility of the president to supervise the government. He added that the notions of a super presidency are simply a misunderstanding. “What the presidency has been able to do, is to coordinate the functions of government and to get the cooperative governance system and process to resolve many of over challenges. For instance, the reforms that we’ve been attending to have been really driven through the presidency and treasury. And that has really benefitted our country and our economy.” Concerns Despite Dlamini-Zuma and Ramaphosa trying to ease concerns, civil society, businesses and political parties have not been convinced by the state of the disaster or the creation of an electricity minister. “We do not believe that a state of disaster will cure the government’s inability to address the crisis. It will not make previously inept officials and ministers suddenly competent and willing to do their jobs,” civil action group Outa said. Yael Geffen, CEO of Lew Geffen Sotheby’s International Realty, criticised the addition of an electricity minister, saying it further bloats the government and increases the public sector wage bill. The Democratic Alliance, meanwhile, said that a state of disaster could allow for further corruption and looting by politicians. The opposition party said that it will challenge the notion in court. Trade union Solidarity echoed similar sentiments to the DA and will also launch its own legal challenge against the state of the disaster. The DA on Friday (10 February) said that, in addition to challenging the national state of disaster, the party has written to the Judge President of the Supreme Court of Appeal for an urgent court date to hear its existing challenge to the constitutionality of Section 27 of the Disaster Management Act. Since 2021, the DA has been fighting to have Section 27 of the DMA declared unconstitutional as it leaves Parliament with no formal and direct supervisory role on decisions taken under the Act, even as it transfers extensive legislative powers to the national executive for indefinite periods of time. “Section 27 as it stands, gives Dlamini-Zuma extensive power to declare a State of Disaster without tabling it in Parliament and does not compel her to provide reasons for regulations made and directions issued under such a declaration,” the party said. “Worst of all, Dlamini-Zuma, and not Parliament, has the power to authorise the extensions of a national state of disaster. Basically, Dlamini-Zuma becomes a law unto herself.” Read: South Africa is stretched thin