The South African Reserve Bank (SARB), through the Financial Sector Contingency Forum (FSCF), is preparing contingencies for a national grid failure. While the central bank stressed that it is unlikely that a regional or national grid failure could occur, as part of its mandate to maintain financial stability in the country, it must look into such systemic risks. The bank has been preparing plans to respond to a national or regional electricity grid failure since 2015, noting that the preparations form part of its responsibility to compile and test crisis management plans. “As part of these preparations, the FSCF has been in regular contact with Eskom, the petroleum industry and the telecommunications industry. The FSCF also conducts periodic crisis simulation exercises to test the financial sectors’ ability to respond to such shocks,” said the bank. “Crisis management plans are typically based on a range of likely but low-probability scenarios, and the fact that a crisis management plan exists should not be interpreted as a signal that the SARB is anticipating specific scenario to materialise.” According to the SARB, the FSCF was established after the 2001 September 11th terror attacks in the United States by the then-governor, Tito Mboweni, as a forum where industry and regulators could discuss financial stability issues on a regular basis. The FSCF has since been formally constituted under South African law and is now tasked with assisting authorities in identifying and mitigating risks that could threaten the functioning and stability of the country’s financial system. “Such risks include the possibility of terror attacks, disruptive cyberattacks, pandemics such as Covid-19 and interruptions of physical infrastructure such as water, telecommunications and electricity,” said the SARB. “Summarily, the FSCF  helps to test and enhance the financial system’s resilience to respond to any such shocks.” The FSCF currently consists of the government and financial sector heavyweights, including the deputy governor of the SARB, Kuben Naidoo as chairman and members ranging from the National Treasury to the Financial Sector Conduct Authority, among others. The likelihood of a national grid shutdown is not out of the realm of possibility, with many experts warning that the situation in the country is more dire than authorities are letting on. In late 2022, energy expert Professor Anton Eberhard from the University of Cape Town’s Graduate School of Business said that if Eskom is unable to fuel its diesel open cycle gas turbines continually, it could increase the intentionality of widespread system failure. Despite Eberhard’s statement being made in November last year, the procurement of diesel at power stations across the country remains a challenge, while gas turbines meant to only be engaged during emergency scenarios run almost continuously. In January this year, energy analyst Chris Yelland added that the failing power utility Eskom exists “hand to mouth“, struggling to scrounge up a sufficient supply of diesel. Eskom is now forming contingency plans for stage 8 load shedding while the country already faces the continuation of the worst load shedding ever experienced. The utility’s CEO, Andre de Ruyter, said the possibility of stage 8 load shedding is constantly looming due to the grid’s significant unreliability and limited capacity of 2,000 MW to manage system failures. However, he said grid collapse is improbable and that the whole point of load shedding was to prevent this from happening. He does not believe the country will go past stage 8 load shedding, but the load shedding schedules are currently being reviewed, with some energy experts anticipating an adjustment to stage 10. Read: The best-case scenario for rooftop solar tax breaks in South Africa: expert