The legal profession in South Africa offers one of the highest-paying and most lucrative careers in the country, with many legacy and emerging fields requiring highly skilled individuals to make sure affairs are in order. According to two salary reviews by professional services and recruitment firms, Michael Page and Robert Walters, it is evident that these professional skills come with salaries to match. South Africa’s legal sector faces a shortage of skilled specialists, with Michael Page noting a growing gap in the market over the last few years due to attractive international opportunities drawing many local legal professionals to emigrate. Specifically, specialist lawyers within the banking, finance and mergers & acquisition space are in big demand in South Africa, especially catering to tech law, legal compliance and African experience. “South Africa is considered a major commercial hub in setting a favourable landscape in support of the exponential growth of the fintech sector, both locally and across the African continent. Lawyers who possess the necessary skills and experience within the fintech / IT and ICT sectors are in high demand during this growth phase,” Michael Page said. Meanwhile, there has been a notable increase in the need for compliance professionals as companies are expected to comply with relevant legislation and regulations to mitigate business risk and operate in an ethical manner. “Knowledge and implementation of the POPI Act have been of special interest since companies have had to be fully compliant since mid-2021,” the firm said. Given the local constraints on available skills, however, the group said that companies will have to regularly evaluate their attraction and retention strategies of specialist hires in order to remain competitive and be considered as a compelling employer of choice in the current market. “Clearly defined growth and succession plans, lucrative salaries and incentive structures, exposure to top quality work and a progressive work culture are some of the main considerations.” Salaries When it comes to salaries then, it is clear why legal professionals are drawing premium earnings. Based on Michale Page’s salary data, even support staff within legal firms, such as legal secretaries who draw the smallest salary of between R300,000 and R550,000 per year (R25,000 to R46,000 a month) still out-earn the average salary in the country. Those who have the mettle to stick it out and soar up the ranks of top law firms, meanwhile, can end up earning over R5 million a year as a senior partner (over R415,000 a month). Fresh graduates, operating as candidate attorneys, also start out at R25,000 a month. Robert Walters’ data shows an even bigger salary range for entry-level lawyers, with associates earning R600,000 a year. The tables below outline the minimum and maximum estimates for legal sector salaries from both recruitment firms. Michael Page Robert Walters Read: Some CEOs in South Africa are paid up to 700 times more than their workers