Training, skills development and changing lives are our purpose as a higher education institution. IIE Rosebank College, a brand of The Independent Institute of Education (The IIE), believes in changing the lives of the youth and lifelong learners in South Africa and abroad. Click here to find out more about what IIE Rosebank College has to offer. IIE Rosebank College also invests in their staff through various training and development initiatives. We spent a few minutes with Tina Gustavo, Training Manager at IIE Rosebank College, to get her views on training and development for the 21st-century employee. Tina has recently joined IIE Rosebank College and is sure to make moves and empower the IIE Rosebank College family. Let us get to know some of Tina’s views. Training and upskilling staff in an organisation are essential to arm employees with the knowledge to do their jobs more effectively and efficiently. Training and upskilling of employees leads to enhanced performance, increased productivity, improved morale, and gives employees the confidence to do their job to the best of their abilities and improves employee growth aspects within an organisation. The following soft skills are vital in any role for employees to perform effectively: Time Management is essential to alleviate unnecessary stress and anxiety and empowers employees to plan, prioritise and manage their work.
Written, verbal and visual communication enables employees to understand what is expected of them.
Teamwork is another necessary skill, as team members must collaborate, problem-solve, and innovate. In today’s fast-paced world, the ability to innovate is essential to keeping afloat, improving customer service, and driving the business forward.
Conflict resolution and negotiation skills are essential, as the workplace is diverse. These skills allow for cohesion between team members and business units and can even improve client relations. Securing first-time employment can be challenging, and graduates need to find innovative ways of setting themselves apart. With these three skills, graduates can increase their chances of securing first-time employment. However, a good attitude, having a teachable spirit, being open to learning new things, and listening can either land you the job or not. Communication skills; the ability to communicate at all levels is essential.
Adaptability and flexibility; ability to work alone or as part of a team.
Analytical thinking, problem-solving, and creativity to innovate and improve business processes. Set goals for yourself and hold yourself accountable.
Put your hand up to assist wherever possible so that you can learn and absorb all aspects of the company you work for.
Learn and absorb as much as possible, as this will become a good grounding for better career opportunities. Obtaining your qualification is only the beginning, as you will need to put the qualification into practice and start learning the ropes. Workplace dynamics can be challenging for graduates. It is essential to network and find individuals with similar roles to learn from their experience. It is never too early to start upskilling yourself; learning is how we grow and should be constant. In your first three months in a position, you should learn and absorb as much knowledge as possible. There is so much to learn in a new job that the upskilling starts from the first day. It would help if you got to know the people, how the job works and how the company operates. It is in your best interest to take advantage of every opportunity, even if it is not your job. It is as an opportunity to learn a new skill and influence your career growth. Most employers have learning and development divisions to upskill their staff and to create succession plans to ensure the business operates, no matter what. It is, however, your responsibility to communicate your career goals accordingly and hold yourself accountable. You can master and refine your skills; it is in your hands. You can find out more about what IIE Rosebank College has to offer here.