Huawei’s latest flagship smartphone, the Mate50 Pro, is now available at South Africa’s top retailers and on the Huawei online store. This smartphone has generated plenty of excitement in the local market since being announced and had a very successful pre-order period. Get the Huawei Mate50 Pro from the Huawei online store. This is the best smartphone for any South African who wants a combination of style and substance, providing most complete smartphone experience on the market. We highlight what makes it great, below. A standout feature of the Huawei Mate50 Pro is its remarkable camera system. This system is the top-rated smartphone camera on DXOMark’s rankings, and features a 64MP telephoto lens, a 50MP Ultra Aperture lens, and a 13MP ultra-wide angle lens. The telephoto lens is particularly impressive, as it allows you to use up to 200 x zoom range – effectively turning your smartphone into a pair of binoculars. Another impressive feature of this camera system is that it offers adjustable physical aperture – allowing you to tailor the blur and depth of field in every photo you take. All of this is then powered by XMAGE, Huawei’s latest photography engine, which continues upon Huawei’s legacy of offering the latest and greatest in smartphone camera technology.  The Mate50 Pro’s excellent camera is housed in an elegant Space Ring that is finished with a Clous de Paris design. Clous de Paris is a subtle step-patterned, embossing design that is traditionally used on luxury watches. It works particularly well with the Vegan Leather edition of the Mate 50 Pro – ensuring that your smartphone looks and feels luxurious. Another important design choice was the implementation of Huawei’s Kunlun Glass – which is the first smartphone glass ever to receive 5-star glass drop resistance certification from SGS. Your screen will be up to 10-times more drop resistant than previous Huawei smartphones, and protects the Mate50 Pro’s gorgeous 6.74-inch FullView screen. This display boasts a resolution of 2,616 x 1,212, a refresh rate of up to 120Hz, and a billion colours – ensuring you always get great image quality. Huawei has paired this with a 300Hz touch sampling rate for a smooth experience when swiping through menus and messages, while 3D facial recognition and in-screen fingerprint technology will keep all your personal data protected. Powering these advanced features is a set of impressive hardware, including the latest Qualcomm Snapdragon 8+ Gen1 mobile processor, 8GB RAM, and a 4,600mAh battery that supports 66W wired SuperCharge and 50W wireless Supercharge.  You can buy the Huawei Mate50 Pro from South Africa’s top retailers, as well as the Huawei online store, for the following prices: Huawei Mate50 Pro 256GB – From R24,999
Huawei Mate50 Pro 512GB – From R26,999 Click here to buy the Mate50 Pro from the Huawei online store.