The South African Revenue Service (SARS) has announced that the new online traveller declaration system that grants a travel pass via email is planned to be implemented at all airports in the country. The new system was successfully trialled from 29 November 2022 as phase 1 of the project at King Shaka International Airport, SARS said. The next phase of the implementation is to roll out the system at all airports, starting with: Cape Town International Airport on 28 February 2023
O.R. Tambo International Airport on 23 March 2023
Other airports in the second and third quarters of 2023
Land ports, namely Beit Bridge and Skilpadshek, after that. The Cape Town Seaport is also in line to implement the system during the last quarter of 2023, SARS added. Although it will have a widespread implementation, the new system will continue on a voluntary basis during the pilot phase until further notice, SARS said. The pilot project results will be applied as SARS rolls out the system in line with customs legislation. The new system introduced by SARS is a web-based application that allows travellers to pre-declare goods they have acquired and pay the applicable taxes upon entering or leaving the country. It requires travellers to declare various goods, including products purchased or acquired abroad, repaired or remodelled goods, and anything that is prohibited or controlled by law. “Travellers who are travelling with children or infants will also need to complete a declaration on their behalf.” Beyers Theron, the director of customs and border control at SARS, said when the first pilot was launched, travel cards and declaration documents were becoming increasingly prevalent worldwide. Currently, all visitors to South Africa are required to fill out a paper-based Traveler Card (TC-01) at the airport if they have any items to declare, said the director. SARS aims to change this by introducing an online system to streamline the process and make it more efficient. This shift to an online declaration process is expected to provide a smoother experience for travellers at any entry or exit point in South Africa. Under the revenue service’s aim to further modernise and tax a firm stance against tax non-compliance, the new declaration system forms part of its new SMART border project. Read: The average take-home pay in South Africa right now