Over the last few years we have seen some very definite, and probably sustainable, shifts in buyer/renter demands, which means that now, perhaps more than ever before, it’s important to make sure that your investment property is future-fit. Which brings us to Sũro Sea Point, launching 1st of March! Click here to enquire now. Sũro Sea Point is a new block of 42 beautifully spacious, one and two-bedroom apartments, most with ample balconies and arresting views. Situated at the heart of Sea Point, it’s close to Table Mountain and Cape Town’s best beaches, yet just minutes from the city centre and the V&A Waterfront. In addition to a prime location and great living spaces, Sũro offers the following: Cutting edge tech to connect your work and home.
24/7 best-practice security.
Secure undercover parking (optional).
Storage units (optional).
Plus! A convenient Aparthotel service. Let’s take a look at some of the prevalent trends that help to make a unit at Sũro such a great investment. Reports last year showed the South African housing market experiencing extremely high levels of activity and while bond registrations were generally up, sectional titles sales increased by a massive 50% – with good locations in Cape Town in very high demand.  It’s hard to resist the adage of location, location, location when talking about investment properties. Proximity to amenities, green spaces, great views and a safe environment are all factors in a neighbourhood’s desirability. Sea Point answers everyone’s social needs; with world class bars and restaurants, as well as access to the promenade and several beautiful beaches, all within easy walking distance. When it comes to creating a sanctuary, there are very few apartment buildings that can offer the unique combination of size and zen-like ambience that makes Sũro Sea Point so calm and welcoming. In work mode? Sũro Sea Point offers superb connectivity through state of the art internet technology for remote work and it’s just a short drive or Uber-hop to the city centre if that’s where your day needs to be While downsizing is definitely a trend, not everyone is ready or right for a micro-apartment in a massive complex. With just 42 beautifully spacious, one and two-bedroom apartments, Sũro Sea Point is the perfect size. Big enough to offer the benefits of communal living and pooled resources, yet small enough to feel connected and private. Inside, the rooms are generous, airy and welcoming. There’s space to breathe, to work, to entertain, and to truly live. Once the stuff of sitcoms, it’s becoming convenient for friends and families to invest in several apartments, enabling them to create convenient social and support structures. This is especially true for groups of young parents or people with extended multi-generational families. Moving from up-country? Not only do you get great ‘walkability’ in Sea Point, it’s worth noting that the weather here is fantastic, with long light nights in summer and much less wind than the southern or northern suburbs. As the name suggests this is a mix of Japanese and Scandinavian styles which is not only about décor but also about a way of life. Sũro Sea Point offers investors something indefinable, a calm, restorative atmosphere that makes it very easy for renters to imagine living there. Plus if you’d like to enhance appeal to renters, you can create an amazing first impression by choosing one of our designer-furniture packages. 42 airy apartments, 1 or 2 bedroom, most with balconies and views.
Secure undercover parking.
Cutting edge tech to connect your work and home.
24/7 best-practice security.
Proximity to the mountain, beaches, city and Waterfront.
Convenient Aparthotel service.
A good, safe investment for locals and overseas investors. Click here to enquire now. Sales launch 1st of March and availability will be extremely limited!