Coffee culture in South Africa has evolved significantly over the years with the rise of speciality coffee shops and cafes around the country – providing more opportunities for people to enjoy a cup of coffee on the go. Coffee is a staple beverage in South Africa, and coffee shops and cafes have become popular gathering places for people from all walks of life. They provide a space for people to catch up with friends, do business, or enjoy a quiet moment. The rise of speciality coffee shops and cafes has also led to a growing appreciation for high-quality coffee, with coffee shops and cafes offering a wide range of traditional espresso-based drinks to speciality lattes and cappuccinos. According to Insight Survey’s latest Coffee Industry Landscape report, The global coffee market reached an estimated value of $460.0 billion in 2022 – a 12.2% increase from 2021. The market is expected to grow by 5.3% annually and earn approximately $560.1 billion by 2025. According to the report, an average person drinks around 42.6 litres of coffee annually. Although tea recorded a higher consumption volume of 85 litres per person per year, the coffee market remains the largest, as more coffee is used per litre. Regarding the most popular coffee bean variety, Arabica currently holds the largest market share, with the production of this bean type amounting to approximately 53.5% global market in the December 2021/2022* season, noted the report. The popularity of Arabica beans is mainly due to Arabica’s sweet, soft taste, which is low in acidity. The report also highlighted that there is a growing body of research on the health benefits of Coffee consumption, which include assisting in the prevention of several diseases. As a result, several functional coffee products are globally trending amongst consumers due to their added health and wellness benefits. These include collagen coffee, proffee (protein coffee), mushroom coffee, and turmeric lattes – among others. In November 2021, Vida e Caffè launched South Africa’s first functional mushroom cappuccino in partnership with Goodmind. This product consists of a Vida e Caffè cappuccino mixed with Goodmind’s mushroom powder sachets. These sachets come with a blend of seven adaptogenic super mushrooms, including Lion’s Mane (the smart mushroom), Shiitake (the healthy heart mushroom), Cordyceps (the recovery mushroom), and Chaga (the anti-inflammatory mushroom). These mushrooms have been clinically proven to assist with enhanced focus and clarity, increased mental stamina, immunity and stress support. There is no end to the ever-increasing popularity of coffee, coffee houses, and speciality blends in South Africa. In light of this, BusinessTech looked at how coffee prices compare across nine of South Africa’s most popular coffee shops. For the comparison, we looked at the price of a standard or regular-sized cappuccino, americano, single espresso, and a latte. The respective prices were taken from the individual coffee shop and cafe’s website or online research where up-to-date prices were available. Read: This is how much sugar is packed into South Africa’s favourite fizzy drinks