Judged by senior executives and sector specialists from around the world, the Global Finance World’s Best Private Bank Awards honours banks that best serve the specialised needs of high-net-worth clients. Click here to read more about the Global Finance Best Private Bank Award 2023 The winners are those institutions whose qualities rate highly with high-net-worth individuals choosing a wealth management provider. Standard Bank Wealth and Investment South Africa was recognised for its exceptional customer value proposition, insights-led approach, and ability to offer solutions that go beyond banking to enable clients to grow, manage and preserve their generational wealth. “We are honoured that we have once again been named South Africa’s Best Private Bank by Global Finance,” says Sanah Gumede, Head of Standard Bank Wealth and Investment SA. “We are committed to building deep and meaningful relationships with our clients, and we are delighted to have been recognised globally for our bespoke and personalised service, our innovative product range and our ability to meet the generational needs of our clients and their families.” As an integral pillar of the Standard Bank Group, Africa’s largest bank ranked by assets and earnings, Wealth and Investment SA enables its clients to capitalise on both local and global opportunities. The Group’s presence throughout South Africa, Kenya, Nigeria, Ghana, Uganda and Jersey ensures that high-net-worth clients have access to holistic solutions designed to meet their on- and offshore requirements. This international footprint, combined with innovative digital technology that facilitates engagement across multiple platforms, enables clients to leverage the expertise, tools and diversification required to create a globally effective wealth strategy. “When it comes to private banking, business owners and top finance-sector executives are sophisticated and knowledgeable clients, savvy to economic and financial trends, but with a fantastically broad array of needs,” says Joseph Giarraputo, founder and editorial director of Global Finance. “The Global Finance Private Bank Awards highlight institutions that deliver both on the numbers and on the human side.” As a passionate advocate for service excellence, Gumede believes that relationships are key when it comes to creating real and lasting value for clients. “Our core philosophy is based on a real understanding of each client’s unique circumstances and requirements,” she says. “These insights enable us to provide tailored solutions that meet their needs and create opportunities for them to grow and preserve their wealth for future generations.” Having recently celebrated 160 years as a group, Standard Bank continues to cement its place at the forefront of Africa’s financial growth. “It is with great pride that we begin 2023 having won an award that reflects our unwavering commitment to our clients and their wealth journeys,” says Gumede. “We put our clients at the centre of everything we do, and we are truly grateful to have been acknowledged for our efforts.” “We look forward to continuing to deliver award-winning financial solutions that not only meet the generational needs of our clients and their families, but also advance our Group purpose: Africa is our home and we drive her growth.” Founded in 1987, Global Finance has readers in 193 countries and territories, with an audience that includes senior corporate and financial officers responsible for making investment and strategic decisions at multinational companies and financial institutions. Global Finance magazine and its website, GFMag.com, offer analysis and articles that are the legacy of 36 years of experience in international financial markets. Their annual awards have become a trusted standard of excellence for the global financial community. This year’s winners will be honoured at Global Finance’s annual World’s Best Private Bank Awards Ceremony in New York City in early March 2023. Click here to read more about the Global Finance Best Private Bank Award 2023