New AI chatbots – ChatGPT and Google Bard – have the ability to help those in the customer service and education industries, experts say – but won’t be removing the human element from jobs any time soon. After launching in November last year, OpenAI’s ChatGPT is no longer the only chatbot on the market after Google Bard was announced last week. Despite making an error during its official demo – causing Google’s parent company Alphabet Inc’s stock price to drop by more than $100 billion – Bard is expected to challenge ChatGPT in what has become a hotly contested and often controversial space. Google is launching Bard to stop Microsoft’s Bing – which uses ChatGPT – from taking some of its marketshare. According to the most recent data from Statista, Google’s search engine market share is 84.08% compared to Bing’s 8.95%. Despite the recent popularity of chatbots, there are some concerns regarding the technology, as it may give incorrect information – as shown in Bard’s demo – or that it might lead to plagiarism in written works. However, those in the education and customer service fields have expressed excitement over the new technology as it can significantly improve the time taken to do administrative tasks. Education Adam Fairall at Reddam House Atlantic Seaboard said that teachers should embrace chatbots as the education sector can not simply block students from accessing the new technology. Fairall said that, when used correctly, chatbots can reduce lesson preparation time by 80% as lesson plans can be created digitally within minutes, giving teachers more time to assist students with learning barriers and deliver improved lessons. Chatbots will also allow for higher-order thinking among students, allowing them the opportunity to think creatively when delivering work and solving problems in the classroom. However, he warned that educators should be on alert for students who have not learnt the baseline knowledge. Using chatbots can thus reduce preparation and learning times for both teachers and students, but traditional take-home assessments like essays are not viable with chatbots – as students can easily cheat, with teachers needing to think flexibly when assessing students. Fairall states that machine learning will require students to become more practical, as they are not assessed on the concept but rather on how they can use the concept practically to solve a problem. Marketing and Customer Service Algorithm Agency said that chatbots will help digital agencies with improved content generation. Using automated technology can help digital agencies produce high-quality content far quicker than it would be to manually produce the content. However, the Algorithm Agency said that human writers will not be replaced, as chatbots produce copy in a logical and well-structured way which saves time, but it is very easy to see that the copy is AI-generated – with search engines possibly down-weighting AI content in the future. Moreover, all online content will sound similar if it is AI-generated. The Algorithm Agency questions if anyone would want to read online content if it lacked a brand’s voice, tone or creativity. The Algorithm Agency said that the sweet spot is where tech and automation meet with human creative thinking. As chatbots bring improved efficiency into the content creation process, strategists have more time to focus on other key elements of the business. Another key use for chatbots would be imposing the customer experience due to their ability to respond to customer questions. Digital agencies will thus be able to provide more personalised and relevant experiences for customers, which increases customer engagement and loyalty, the agency said. For example, last week, the Dubai Electricity and Water Authority (DEWA) announced that it would use ChatGPT in customer and employee services. DEWA said that this introduction of ChatGPT will endure productivity and meet current and future needs. Read: Banking and legal experts think ChatGPT could be a major disruptor