The internationally recognised Sitari Country Estate being developed by the Amdec Group is one of the most iconic lifestyle estates in the Helderberg basin and indeed the Cape. It offers a contemporary country lifestyle in beautiful surroundings and has proved immensely popular. Just released to market are 53 freestanding homes in Pettigo Crescent, which represents a pocket development within the greater estate that is fully complete, with roads, landscaping and finishes impeccably delivered. Click here for details on properties and pricing at Sitari Country Estate. Says Claudius Combrinck, Managing Director of Sitari Property Sales: “Pettigo Crescent is a fully developed precinct within Sitari Country Estate. The decision by Amdec Group to first complete the homes prior to releasing them to market is an industry anomaly and certainly a welcome surprise to prospective purchasers. It also speaks volumes in terms of the ongoing effort by Amdec Group to entrench Sitari Country Estate as the firm favourite in the Helderberg basin. All of the homes in the Pettigo Crescent precinct are available for viewing, and no less than three have been beautifully furnished as show properties.”  The homes have prime positioning in Sitari, offering effortless access to Olive Grove Park and various estate amenities, including the scenic cycling and jogging route. Developed in partnership with Kevin Gadd Architects, these homes present 3 to 5 bedrooms, with 2 to 3.5 bathrooms, and vary in size from 190 m² to 350 m². They are ideal for family living and exceptionally well-priced, starting from R3 795 000 million for a 3bedroom, 2-bathroom, double garage home, to R5 995 000 for a 5-bedroom, 3- or 3.5bathroom, double garage home (prices include VAT with no transfer duty, transfer cost and bond cost payable). These premium homes present an upmarket property opportunity that has been meticulously detailed in every way.  There are 14 different configurations, each including a double garage with direct access, open-plan lounge and dining room with exposed trusses, contemporary kitchen with scullery and yard, and a covered patio. Seven of the homes are double storey. Each Pettigo Crescent Home has been carefully curated in design by incorporating contemporary, stylish, and homely features, complete with two exterior and interior finishing moods applied – ‘Midnight Moon’ and ‘Earth Awakening’. Midnight Moon features a palette of largely white, greys and charcoal, while Earth Awakening includes soft neutral tones. Fittings and finishes include a freestanding 90 cm Bosch oven and integrated extractor, Quartz countertops, aluminium doors and windows, exposed trusses in the living area, Hansgrohe and Geberit sanitary ware, vinyl flooring and large-format tiles, LED downlights and a solar geyser.  Adds Combrinck, “These premium homes offer family-oriented purchasers easy access to a first-rate security-conscious lifestyle estate. You could be celebrating this season in your brand-new home without the hassle and uncertainty of having to build from scratch.” The estate offers everything that residents could possibly require for their day-to-day living, including a Curro independent school and creche, Sitari Village Mall, an onsite coffee shop, residents-only gym, and various pocket parks. Contact the Sitari Sales Centre on 021 201 7337 or sales@sitari.co.za. Click here for details on properties and pricing at Sitari Country Estate. 