The chief executive of driver training group MasterDrive, Eugene Herbert, says that while electric vehicle (EV) adoption faces many challenges in South Africa, there are just as many solutions – adding that the change to EVs is not a matter of ‘if’ but a ‘when.’ “In the first three months of 2022, South Africa sold over 1,400 electric vehicles. This is more than 2020 and 2021 combined,” he said. While EV adoption in South Africa has been low, the spread of EV technology is expected to continue growing – and this is despite South Africa’s unique energy constraints. Herbert identified three challenges which are commonly divisive put-offs for electric vehicles in South Africa – he also provided some solutions to these issues that are currently being implemented or are coming. Affordability The primary issue for most people concerning EVs is the high initial outlay required, despite the possibility of saving considerably in the long-term, said Herbert. “Higher import costs and a lack of local development combine to create significantly higher costs than internal combustion engines (ICE). Currently, EVs are reserved for premium vehicles in South Africa.” “Out of the country’s top five sellers of vehicles, one focuses on hybrid options; another is investigating the viability of EV options while others have no plans to introduce it to their range anytime soon but intend pursuing other zero-emission options,” said Herbert. He listed the following possible mitigating factors: Affordability would increase once more models are made available;
Price Parity with petrol-engine vehicles is expected by 2025;
The government’s Green Paper is gaining traction and may re-look at the 25% import tax currently imposed on EVs;
Recent talk around increasing EV part development in Africa. Infrastructure An unreliable energy supply poses a unique challenge in South Africa, which is far behind in development. The country also lacks charging points along long-distance routes, said Herbert. However, progress is being made in this regard, despite load shedding, including the rollout of charging ports and stations, as well as using solar backups to mitigate the stresses of blackouts. Jaguar is also installing 82 charging ports in major hubs and popular holiday routes;
BMW has 230 current charging ports;
ZimiCharge, a third-party app, looks to branch into ports – with 10,000 planned;
Mordor Intelligence said significant investment in EWV power capacity is expected over the next decade in Africa. Notably, Audi South Africa announced this week that it added 43 new electric EV charging stations across South Africa, adding to the 70 stations it rolled out in 2022. The new charging stations would allow 57 vehicles to charge simultaneously, regardless of model or brand. A new DC 200KW charger with solar backup is also included in the latest rollout and is based at Mall of Africa in Midrand, Gauteng. This new charger will allow compatible cars to charge incredibly quickly, Audi said. As part of the new rollout, four 100kW (DC), eight 60kW (DC), five 25kW (DC), and 25 22kW (AC) fast EV chargers have been placed across South Africa. Rubicon, Audi’s partner in the rollout, said that charging infrastructure, renewable energy, and energy storage systems will need to be integrated as public interest in EVs grows over the next few years. Despite regular load shedding affecting South Africa, charging networks capitalise on solar installations to keep charging stations performing optimally. Range Anxiety Motorists are particularly concerned that their EV will not make the range of long driving trips, said Herbert. He said that range anxiety is being extensively addressed: Certain vehicles can currently travel up to 470km on a single charge;
New driving habits can increase the range;
EVs are equipped with warning technology that reminds a person to charge;
Plugging a vehicle in at night is expected to become the norm;
Battery usage is not as inefficient as they usually seem; Audi said that those travelling less than 40km a day only need to charge e-trons once a week;
If you cannot charge, most EVs go into an emergency mode that provides smaller amounts of additional range to get to a safe place. South Africa’s development South Africa’s government has been trying to make strides in the electric vehicle market over fear that one of its biggest industries – the automotive industry – would face downside growth and potential lay-offs if it did not make a move toward producing electric vehicles. South Africa is a large exporter of vehicles to Europe. The National Association of Automobile Manufacturers of South Africa (Naamsa) said that it expects 40% of all European vehicle sales to be EVs in 2030 – this could increase to 80% by 2040. “It is clear that we cannot ignore EVs if we want to continue doing business with Europe. It will have a huge impact on the country if we lose R201 billion in export earnings a year,” said Naamsa. South Africa has further received vast amounts of international climate funding for the electric vehicle industry in the country. Out of $8.5 billion granted to South Africa from the US, UK, Germany, France and the EU in the form of loans, the latest plan suggests spending R128 billion on EVs, broken up between industrial development and innovation programs. Read: All the hybrid cars you can buy in South Africa right now – with pricing