Bolton Technical South Africa has announced the launch of a new look to their WilsonPro and weBoost amplifiers. The company has solved countless cellular signal issues across the country with the trusted WilsonPro and weBoost brands. The new line of signal boosters will seamlessly blend in with any modern aesthetic thanks to its clean design, and will still provide the same powerful signal amplification of the previous range. With top of the range enterprise, office, and home cellular signal booster solutions from WilsonPro and vehicle solutions from weBoost, nearly any signal dilemma can be improved. The products are developed and manufactured by Wilson Electronics in Utah USA and stand at the forefront of cellular signal technology. Click here to view the new range of Signal Boosters  South Africa faces many challenges regarding cell phone reception. These challenges include vast landscapes with large spaces between cell phone towers, mountainous terrain, overpopulated urban areas, remote outlying areas and of course, load shedding. While the network providers have tried to ensure the towers stay active during power cuts with backup batteries, they cannot fully recharge these batteries with the frequent and persistent black outs. Additionally, in some cases, the batteries have been stolen, leaving the tower fully inactive during load shedding. A signal booster system may be just what you need to overcome these obstacles and improve your cell phone reception. Bolton Technical has worked closely with their clients to develop customized solutions to these problems. The company offers a turnkey solution – from expert advice to system design and installation – ensuring the most optimized and effective outcome.  Over time, home and office design has become simpler and more minimalistic. Many tech companies have designed their products with this aesthetic in mind. Wilson Electronics has simplified the look of its amplifiers to better suit modern home and working environments.  <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> The most significant changes in the range are to the new weBoost Drive AM100-Pro vehicle kit. The new amplifier is deep red in colour and features a metallic casing with a grill-like pattern designed to displace excess heat for peak performance. This is significantly different from the silver plastic casing of the previous model. The AM100-Pro kit includes an additional updated item, too – the outdoor antenna. The new outdoor antenna has a modern fin-like shape and is more robust compared to the previous 10cm antenna. This kit is perfect for cars, trucks, bakkies and caravans. For trucks and fleets, the weBoost AM100-Pro can be paired with the Bolton Technical trucker antenna, The Bolton Blade. The antenna is robust and ideal for long distance travel.  The WilsonPro A500 Signal Booster solution is the most popular kit for homes. Its original design featured a grey casing with a blue and silver plaque, and three spaced out circular lights. The updated look is still grey but is more rigid in shape. Streamlined lights give the A500 signal booster a cleaner and more modern appearance, too. The new A500 amplifier has a sturdy casing and can be mounted on a wall with a bracket or placed on a flat surface like a shelf or table. With 70dB gain, this signal booster kit will provide reliable connectivity in your home. When purchased as a kit from the online store, the customer will still receive the amplifier, an outdoor antenna (Yagi directional or omni-direction antenna), an indoor antenna (ceiling dome antenna or wall panel antenna) and a LMR400 equivalent cable with connectors.  The powerful WilsonPro A1000 Signal Booster solution is ideal for large homes and offices. With 74dB gain, this system can be split and allows for more indoor broadcasting antennas to extend the boosted signal into multiple rooms and areas. The new design is similar in appearance to the new WilsonPro A500 amplifier. However, the updated look is overall black in colour, a stark difference from the deep blue of the older model. This new colour will blend in better to the aesthetic of home and office environments. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> The new range of WilsonPro and weBoost Signal Boosters is scheduled to arrive at the beginning of February and will be available from the Bolton Technical South Africa online store. All WilsonPro and weBoost Signal Boosters sold by Bolton Technical South Africa are ICASA approved. For advice on the best cellular signal solution for your situation, call or email Bolton’s local customer support team for expert advice.