Power utility Eskom says that load shedding should be eased for the weekend, but the grid is still highly unpredictable. Giving an update on the system on Thursday (2 February), Eskom’s acting head of generation, Thomas Conradie, said that the power utility is bringing a number of generating units online over the next few days, which will reduce the stages of load shedding for the weekend. The group currently anticipates easing to stage 4 load shedding on Friday and moving to stage 3 by Saturday. An assessment will be done over the weekend to determine the outlook for next week, he said. Thursday, 2 February Stage 5: until 00h00 Friday, 3 February Stage 5: 00h00 to 05h00
Stage 4: 05h00 to 00h00 (TBD) Saturday, 4 February Stage 4: 00h00 to 05h00
Stage 3: 05h00 until further notice Conradie said that, over the medium term, more generating units should be brought back from planned maintenance ahead of the winter months, which should help the utility better meet demand over the period. The acting head said that focus is being put on returning units from planned maintenance so this can be done reliably and on time. Unfortunately, when it comes to unplanned outages, units are proving to be unreliable and thus introduce high levels of unpredictability to the system. Sometimes two units a day are lost, other days, there are four or five units, Conradie said, leading to a lack of capacity. Addressing long-term plans, Eskom board member Mteto Nyati said that the group has five key priorities it is focusing on. The first priority is the generation recovery plan, which involves protecting the three flagship power stations that are performing well, and focusing on building up the six underperforming stations which are struggling to maintain energy availability. The second priority is the ensure that the maintenance being done on the Koeberg Nuclear Power Station is on time and does not suffer delays, as well as bringing units 1,2 and 3 at Kusile back into the system. Regarding Koeberg, Eskom said that it has enough fuel for both units at the station for another one to two years and that options are available to secure fuel if needed. This is after the national government let agreements with the United States over fuel supply lapse. The Kusile units, meanwhile, will take up to 12 months to come back online. The third priority for the board is to ensure that Eskom doesn’t run out of money for diesel. “We cannot afford to run out of funds for diesel,” Nyati said. “We are looking for ways we can have the funding because the open-cycle gas turbines are important, so we can reduce the stages of load shedding.” The fourth priority mentioned by Nyati is to ensure that the people and culture at Eskom are supported. Echoing statements from board chair Mpho Makwana when he first took up the position, Nyati said that this involves incentivising workers and boosting morale at the group. He stressed that these unspecified incentives are about finding ways to equip managers with the “necessary tools” to drive morale. In the past, workers and managers were incentivised the same, regardless of performance – the new tactic would be to make these performance-based, he said. The final priority is for the board to work with “government enablers” to help create the environment for new capacity to be introduced to the grid. Schedules For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Government’s roadmap to ending load shedding in South Africa