Rand Water has scheduled a 30-hour planned maintenance, which will commence from 03h00 on 24 February until 09h00 on 25 February 2023. In a statement, Rand Water spokesperson, Makenosi Maroo, said the 30-hour project would entail the implementation of various cross-connections on the entity’s S1, R1 and R5 pipelines to tie in a portion of the S4 pipeline to the existing S1, R1 and R5 pipelines. “This is part of the previously communicated strategy to refurbish and upgrade the infrastructure for sustainability purposes,” Maroo said. She explained that the S1 pipeline runs from the Mapleton Booster Pumping Station to Rynfield Vlakfontein Reservoir, while R1 and R5 pipelines run from Rynfield to Rietvlei Nature Reserve in Tshwane. “The S4 pipeline that will be tied in runs from Van Dyk Park to Rynfield where it will cross-connect to S1, R1 and R5,” Maroo said. The following municipal customers will experience water supply shortages during this period: Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality;
Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality, and
Thembisile Hani Local Municipality. Other customers who will be affected include: Spoornet
Corobrick Transvaal (Pty) Ltd
Sammy Marks Museum
Savannah Country Estate Home
Plot 7 Benoni Agricultural Holdings. Maroo said Rand Water has formally notified all the affected municipalities and direct customers 21 days in advance of the planned maintenance to allow them to implement their appropriate contingency measures ahead of the planned work. “The affected municipalities will advise consumers on the extent of the impact of water supply shortages in their respective areas,” Maroo said. Rand Water has also urged all consumers to use water sparingly The City of Tshwane has already published a list of areas that will be affected by the outage – the full list can be seen here.  The City of Ekurhuleni said the following areas will be most affected: Morehill
Crystal Park
Hillcrest
Benoni AH
Cloverdene
Chief Albert Luthuli
Putfontein
Daveyton
Mayfield
Etwatwa Read: Cape Town’s massive 500MW plan to stop load shedding