The Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (Outa) says that ratepayers in the City of Joburg need to check that their property valuations are reasonable so as to not overpay on property rates. The group’s Community Action Network (CAN) said that the City of Joburg had determined a new value for 934,652 properties in the metro area. Owners of said properties are set to be charged rates based on the updated valuations from July 2023. Time Tyrell, a project manager at CAN, said that if you are a property owner in the area, whether it be residency or business premises, you will be affected by the new general valuation roll. “You have till 31 March to review the newly proposed valuation and object to it should it be unreasonable. If the City over-values your property, it will overcharge you on rates,” said Tyrrell. The city determines the values of your property on a market-related “willing seller to willing buyer” value as of 1 July 2022, he said. The rates are charged at a rate-in-the-rand based on the valuations. “We have already determined that some properties in the City have been overvalued, and community members have already objected to some increases of over 70%. One property owner indicated how, with the new increase, his property rates would go up by R1,000 per month. If you don’t object, you accept,” said Tyrrell. The city has indicated that property owners have 45 days to object from when the general valuation roll for 2023 was published on 15 February 2023 and closes on 31 March 2023. “There should be no discrepancy between your municipal property valuation and your property’s actual value. Failure to object to discrepancies between these two values not only affects your rates and taxes but can also affect future sales values.” “It is up to you, the homeowner, to identify and object to any discrepancies, not the municipality, so be sure to ascertain both values and ensure that no issues are present,” said Hayley Ivins-Downes, the head of digital for property research group Lightstone. Outa provided the following steps to look into your valuation: Compare the new value with the current value on your latest City of Joburg invoice. If the new value has significantly increased, you can object to it to potentially get a reduced deal. You don’t need to do anything if you think the new value is fair. If you would like to object, continue with the process. Determine the value of your property and compare. Lodge a complaint with the City of Joburg here. Read: South Africa’s 2023 budget in a nutshell