The auditing fraternity has been in the spotlight for various challenges globally, sparking businesses to take closer scrutiny on how they appoint external auditing firms. Amid this scrutiny came opportunities for local firms to diversify their offerings and strengthen their capabilities across advisory and external auditing services to create long-term value for clients. With over 20 years of experience specialising in audit, advisory and consulting services, SkX (previously SekelaXabiso), was established through the combined expertise of two highly qualified teams of professionals with vast experience and impeccable credentials. Click here to learn more about SkX. The combined knowledge and business acumen of SkX directors put the firm in an ideal position to deliver world-class, client-focused business solutions to a growing range of clients in both the private and public sectors. Lindani Dhlamini, co-founder and CEO at SkX says that the organisation has been one of a few successful transformation stories in South Africa and a beacon of hope for Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment. “We represent a truly African firm reflecting the South African demographics in an industry that is dominated by international corporations,” she says, adding that “our return to external audit allows us to contribute to authentic transformation in this landscape, in that we are 100% black-owned and 50% women-owned, a commitment that very few in our industry can claim.” “The mandatory auditor rotation regulations which become effective in the current year 2023, require companies to rotate auditors every 10 years. Given the fact that the assurance market is highly concentrated in terms of the entities at the client’s disposal, we saw an opportunity to position ourselves as a homegrown firm that is truly transformed and can offer potential clients more options.” “As a homegrown and indigenous firm with multidisciplinary capabilities, we are able to leverage our expertise ranging from ESG solutions, supply chain management, corporate finance, to information technology consulting, amongst others,” she says. Dhlamini laments that SkX’s success has been underpinned by their relentless commitment to adding value to clients. “We build value for our clients through the strength of our people by investing in training and development and utilising world-class methodologies. Having attracted highly skilled and committed professionals from the industry, we continue to cope with the increasing demands of a client list growing in both size and scope.” “We have the capacity, the people, and we are ready to contribute meaningfully to fulfil client needs. To this end, we are pleased to announce the appointment of Dumisani Manana as the head of our assurance business unit.” He is a Registered Auditor (RA) with more than 20 years’ experience in auditing, advisory and corporate reporting, and is one of the founding members of the Financial Reporting Standards Council (FRSC) and a former member of the IRBA Committee for Auditing Standards. The long list of high-profile clients which is now housed within SkX is a testament to the firm’s combined strength, its customer-focused approach and excellent service. SkX boasts a diverse list of blue-chip clients in the public and private sector that the firm has served over the years, including Nedbank, Old Mutual, Harith General Partners, National Empowerment Fund (NEF), Harmony, Rio Tinto, Foskor, Telkom, MTN , BCX, Airports Company South Africa, Transnet and Metrofile amongst others. The diverse client base has enabled SkX to develop deep skills in sectors such as financial services, ICT, mining, transport & logistics, and the public sector at large. Dhlamini credits SkX’s accolades to the firm’s diverse people. “We believe our success has been primarily due to the calibre of people we bring into our organisation,” she says. “Our business is guided by our values, which are underpinned by ethical leadership. At SkX, we are solutions-driven and we strive to consistently work with our clients to find lasting and impactful solutions.” “Our firm has demonstrated that we are resilient, having thrived through the COVID-19 pandemic when other firms could not survive.” “We are proud of our work, the talent of our people, the depth of their experience and our ability to respond to our client’s needs. We are truly pleased to relaunch our External Audit services,” Dhlamini concludes.